---
title: >-
  BP accused of ‘insidious’ influence on UK education through Science Museum
  links
slug: bp-accused-of-insidious-influence-on-uk-education-through-science-museum-links
category: education
difficulty: Short Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p>Campaigners claim firm has bought sway over the teaching of science,
  technology, engineering and maths </p>
word_count: 590
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C2
---
<p>Campaigners have accused BP of having an insidious influence over the teaching of science, technology, engineering and maths (Stem) in the UK through its relationship with the Science Museum.</p> <p>Documents obtained under freedom of information legislation show how the company funded a research project that led to the creation of the Science Museum Group academy – its teacher and educator training programme – which BP sponsors and which has run more than 500 courses, for more than 5,000 teachers.</p> <p>Campaigners say the documents reveal the extent of control the company had over the research project, called Enterprising Science. The contract setting out the collaboration states that major decisions would not be “validly passed … unless the representative of BP votes in its favour”.</p> <p>Chris Garrard of the campaign group Culture Unstained said: “BP’s toxic influence over young people’s learning is calculated and insidious.</p> <p>“We wouldn’t allow tobacco companies to be involved in crafting approaches to education, so why should BP – a company shunning the scientific consensus on climate change <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/business/2025/feb/26/bp-oil-and-gas-spending-green-energy-scale-back">by ramping up drilling for oil and gas</a> – be able to buy such an influential and prominent role?”</p> <p>The Science Museum dismissed the claims, saying that although BP funded the Enterprising Science project and was sponsoring the academy, it had “no involvement in the research or educational output”.</p> <p>A spokesperson said: “The sponsorship we receive from a wide range of funders, including BP which supports the Science Museum Group academy, is vital to our mission to inspire millions of people every year. The Science Museum Group retains editorial control of all training and resources produced by the academy.”</p> <p>BP said in statement: “The project led to the creation of the Science Museum academy in 2018, which continues to inspire educators delivering engaging Stem experiences in and outside the classroom.”</p> <p>The Science Museum has faced repeated criticism over its ties to BP. It was forced to defend them last year after the company announced it was <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/business/2025/feb/26/bp-oil-and-gas-spending-green-energy-scale-back">abandoning its climate targets</a> to focus on increasing fossil fuel production.</p> <p>Garrard said: “With young people refusing to lend their talents to fossil fuel producers and students barring them from their recruitment fairs, the industry is facing a recruitment crisis. So, whose side is the Science Museum really on when it backs BP?”</p> <p>The museum is facing a growing campaign, not just from climate groups, but also from schools and teachers’ unions, over its fossil fuel links.</p> <p>The National Education Union’s green representative, Helen Tucker, said more teachers were asking whether they could participate in the Science Museum academy “whose curriculum was developed with oversight from very people who are causing climate change – BP”.</p> <p>“As educators, it is our responsibility to resist the greenwashing and the image-laundering of those destroying our children’s futures. We all have too much to lose. The NEU will continue to support the boycott of the Science Museum until this publicly funded institution learns how to train Stem educators without allowing fossil fuel producers to profit from it.”</p> <p>More than <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2022/jul/15/hundreds-of-teachers-boycott-science-museum-over-adani-sponsorship">400 teachers and scientists</a> pledged to boycott the Science Museum in 2022.</p>
