---
title: 'Chance of alien life ‘goes to heart’ of space missions, Nasa chief says'
slug: chance-of-alien-life-goes-to-heart-of-space-missions-nasa-chief-says
category: space
difficulty: Short Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p>Jared Isaacman says odds of evidence we are not alone are ‘pretty high’
  four days after Artemis II rocket lifted off</p><ul><li><p><a
  href="https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2026/apr/05/nasa-orion-spaceship-artemis-ii-mission-in-pictures">Nasa’s
  Orion spaceship four days into Artemis II mission: in
  pictures</a></p></li></ul>
word_count: 782
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C2
---
<p>The top official at <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa">Nasa</a> says that the chance of alien existence is a factor in how the US space agency plans its missions.</p> <p>Speaking on Sunday, the Nasa administrator, Jared Isaacman, told CNN’s Meet the Press that investigating the existence of alien life “goes to the heart of many things that we do at Nasa”, adding: “Our job here is to go out and try and unlock the secrets of the universe.”</p> <p>One of the questions, he said, was “are we alone? So I would say that is inherent in every one of our scientific endeavors, our exploration endeavors.”</p> <p>Issacman pointed to a potential moon base on the south pole of the moon that would incorporate telescopes “that will help us continue this great search”.</p> <aside class="element element-rich-link element--thumbnail"> <p> <span>Related: </span><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/science/2026/apr/05/artemis-ii-astronauts-nasa-far-side-of-moon">Artemis II astronauts expected to reach far side of moon on Monday</a> </p> </aside>  <p>But the official qualified his comments, offering that he had been to space twice and “didn’t encounter any aliens up there. I have not seen anything to suggest that we have been visited by any intelligent life forms out there.”</p> <p>But, he added, “when you think about it, we got 2tn galaxies out there. Who knows how many star systems within each of it? I would say the odds that we will find something at some point to suggest that we are not alone are pretty high.”</p> <p>Isaacman’s comments come four days into <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/science/2026/apr/05/artemis-ii-astronauts-nasa-far-side-of-moon">Nasa’s Artemis mission</a> to circumnavigate the moon, the first lunar mission since 1972. The four crew members of the Orion spacecraft crew were <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/science/2026/apr/03/artemis-ii-astronauts-rocket-towards-the-moon-after-breaking-free-of-earths-orbit">closer to the moon</a>, at 110,700 miles (178,000km), than to Earth, at 169,000 miles, when they woke up on Saturday.</p> <p>The capsule will loop around the moon’s far side, a milestone that will occur on Monday evening, and slingshot back toward Earth where it is expected to arrive on Friday.</p> <p>On CBS’s Face the Nation, Isaacman said the astronauts were prepared for the communication blackout that will happen when they loop the moon, saying: “Astronauts are used to that going through training.”</p> <p>He emphasized that for this phase of the mission, the first objective was to gather data from Orion’s life support system.</p> <p>“This is the first time we’ve ever had humans on board the Orion spacecraft,” he said. “We want to gather as much data as we possibly can for that ... Learning as much as we can about Orion is critically important.”</p>    <p>The next mission, Artemis III, is scheduled for launch in mid-2027. Isaacman said. “That’s where we’re going to test the same spacecraft with our lunar landers, followed up in 2028 by Artemis IV, where we’re going to use this spacecraft to transfer crew to the landers and put American astronauts back on the surface of the moon”.</p> <p>Nasa has said it was <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/science/2026/apr/02/nasa-artemis-ii-orion-spaceship-toilet">able to fix</a> the spacecraft’s $30m, titanium vacuum-based Universal Waste Management System (UWMS) toilet to normal operations. The crew had reported a blinking fault light on the system, which requires headphones to use, and uses suction to separate waste, venting urine into space and storing fecal matter in canisters for return to Earth.</p> <p>Isaacman addressed the issue on Sunday with CNN, saying: “Throughout the history of human spaceflight, so going from the Mercury, Gemini, Apollo program, to shuttle, to Mir and International Space Station to Dragon, which I flew on, and, of course, Orion, the toilet working is almost a bonus capability.”</p> <p>He added that of all the “extraordinary things in space right now”, a working bathroom remains elusive. “Nailing this capability is one that we need to certainly work on I will say we build in a lot of backups,” Isaacman said, pointing to different vent lines to jettison urine.</p> <p>“Even when we have an issue with some freezing on the primary, the secondary has been working. So, believe me, the astronauts, they’re OK right now, and they were well prepared for the situation,” he said.</p>
