---
title: Cost of private psychology soars in UK as practitioners turn away clients
slug: cost-of-private-psychology-soars-in-uk-as-practitioners-turn-away-clients
category: Psychology
difficulty: Short Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p>Prices have risen by 34% since 2022, with 29% of psychologists refusing new
  patients</p>
word_count: 661
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C1
---
<p>The cost of seeing private psychologists is soaring and many are so busy they are turning away new clients, research has found.</p> <p>The prices psychologists charge have risen by 34% since 2022 and 12 sessions now cost an average of £1,550, compared with £1,152 just three years ago, according to a <a href="https://www.mytribeinsurance.co.uk/treatment/cost-to-see-a-private-psychologist">survey</a> by myTribe Insurance, which tracks the cost of private medical care.</p> <p>Almost three in 10 (29%) psychologists are already treating so many patients that they are not taking on new ones, according to a survey of practitioners across the UK.</p> <p>The sometimes months-long delays people face in their efforts to access NHS mental healthcare and the record number of people seeking help, usually for anxiety or depression, appear to underlie the double-whammy facing patients of fee uplifts and closed waiting lists.</p> <aside class="element element-rich-link element--thumbnail"> <p> <span>Related: </span><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/money/2025/sep/15/occupational-health-service-fabian-society">Labour urged to create ‘national occupational health service’</a> </p> </aside>  <p>Chris Steele, the founder of myTribe Insurance, said: “What we’ve seen over the last three years is a market that has become significantly more expensive for patients. A 34% rise in consultation fees is not just a statistic. It shows how private talking therapies are moving further out of reach for many people who need them.”</p> <p>While many people are seeking help from a psychologist in private practice, the survey of 349 practitioners found that doing so can involve high prices, long waits and online-only care. The findings include:</p> <ul> <li><p>The average cost of a consultation in the UK has risen from £96 in 2022 to £129.20 in 2025.</p></li> <li><p>Psychologists in England charge the most (£131) per session and those in Scotland the least (£124).</p></li> <li><p>Those in Scotland have the shortest waiting times (16.9 days), and people in Wales the longest (23.8 days).</p></li> </ul> <p>Leicester-based psychologists charge an average of £164 for a session, with London second on £160. Colchester, Bath and Coventry charge £85, £99 and £100 respectively.</p> <p>Steele advised people seeking help to shop around and be prepared to accept online support provided far from their home in order to beat delays and pay less.</p> <p>The British Psychological Society, which represents 19,000 of the UK’s 27,774 psychologists, said they had increased their charges to help cover rises in the cost of living.</p> <p>A spokesperson said: “With the continuing postcode lottery for accessing NHS mental health support, increasing numbers are seeking out private treatment. This is causing private providers to reach capacity and [be] unable to take on new clients. Demand is outstripping supply on all fronts.”</p> <p>One in three people waiting for NHS mental health care end up going private because of delays, <a href="https://www.rethink.org/media/dz4b1ydr/right-treatment-right-time-report.pdf">according to research</a> last year by Rethink Mental Illness. The rising cost of private psychology is “troubling”, and the trend towards private care could lead to a “two-tier system”, it said.</p> <p>Jeremy Bernhaut, the charity’s head of policy and influencing, said: “There are an estimated 1.8 million people waiting for [NHS] mental health care [in England] and the consequences are severe: suicide attempts, lost jobs and hospitalisation, which puts strain on the wider NHS.”</p> <p>The number of people on the waiting list for support from NHS community-based mental health and learning disability services in England has risen <a href="https://www.england.nhs.uk/publication/nhs-mental-health-dashboard/">from 1.56 million last year to 1.79 miillion</a>.</p> <p>NHS England said more than a million people a year received help from its talking therapies services. A spokesperson said: “We plan to expand the service further, increasing the therapist workforce and reducing waiting times.”</p>
