---
title: Digital technology helps make health equity in Australia a reality
slug: digital-technology-helps-make-health-equity-in-australia-a-reality
category: Science & Technology
difficulty: Evening Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p>For many people in Australia’s diverse and dispersed population, digital
  tools are supporting accessible healthcare</p>
word_count: 1024
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C2
---
<p>In 2007 Patrick Dillon became a quadriplegic. But this proud Ugarapul man and Brisbane-based father maintains his independence and manages his health with the support of a multi-disciplinary care team, and digital health technology. </p> <p>Dillon’s life changed when he struck his head underwater after swinging from a rope into the Dawson River in Central Queensland.</p> <p>“I knew immediately something was wrong,” he says. “I couldn’t move my arms or legs underwater. Then I swallowed water and drowned.”</p> <p>Dillon was left with multiple spinal fractures and despite intensive rehabilitation, his future was shaping up to be different to the one he had envisioned. </p>    <ul> <li><p>Patrick Dillon. Photo supplied.</p></li> </ul> <p>“I was always active and independent,” he says. “I played lots of footy and pretty much lived outdoors. The biggest frustration was not being able to do the things I used to be able to.” </p> <p>Since his accident, Dillon has embraced technology to support his independence and coordinate his care team. </p> <p>“My Health Record and my health app have been game changers for my care team. Having access to the same information means each of them can see when I last had prescriptions dispensed, my upcoming appointments, or any other information that helps them plan.” </p> <p>While Dillon’s injuries are the result of an accident, he’s all too aware of the chronic health conditions that can affect First Nations communities.</p> <h2>Supporting equitable healthcare</h2> <p>Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples experience significant disparities in the availability and accessibility of healthcare.</p> <p>Aboriginal Medical Services (AMS), well established in a number of locations across the country, provide culturally safe, holistic care to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities. Now, digital tools can support AMS and empower people in these communities by making key health care information accessible. </p> <p>“The technology is getting better every day,” Dillon says. “I can see a real benefit in My Health Record and my health app for people in my community who are suffering chronic illness. </p> <p>“I’ve found that having direct access to my key health data makes me feel more informed. It makes me feel more independent and I don’t have to repeat myself and go through my medical history every time I see a new doctor.”</p> <p>Ready access to health information, he says, is improving accessible healthcare not only in metro communities like his, but right across the country. </p> <h2>Accessible healthcare in one of Australia’s largest – and most remote – regions</h2> <p>For pharmacist Hannah Mann, remote Australia is home. She calls herself a “product of successful student placements” and, for 20 years, she’s been helping to supply medicines and other pharmaceutical services to people in northern Western Australia.</p> <p>Based in Broome, Mann works with Aboriginal health services such as Kimberley Aboriginal Medical Service (KAMS), a member-based Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation. Every day, she dispenses prescriptions and offers pharmaceutical advice for people with vastly differing needs and in varied cultural contexts.</p> <p>“The big thing is the distance,” she says. “The Kimberley is massive; our service looks after patients across an area twice the size of Victoria.”</p> <p>The Kimberley covers 420,000 sq km, and Mann supports people in regional cities to residents of remote First Nations communities to visiting tourists.</p> <p>“Just geographically, supplying medications and services over that distance is always going to be a challenge,” she says. “That’s why any form of digital solution is a step in the right direction for us. Any way we can make information available in real time to everyone involved in the care of a patient, we make it better and safer.”</p> <h2>Digital tools break down barriers to better care</h2> <p>Mann started her career at a time when prescriptions and health records came via fax or in the post. Vital medical information could be lost, missed or simply not arrive in time. Now, digital tools such as My Health Record, my health app, electronic prescribing and the Active Script List allow health information to be stored securely online and accessed from anywhere.</p>    <ul> <li><p>Hannah Mann. Photo credit: Abby Murray.</p></li> </ul> <p>“We upload something to My Health Record and the healthcare provider and the record’s owner can see it straight away,” Mann says. “It’s confidential and it’s private – and they can choose to share that information.” </p> <p>The impact this has on a region such as the Kimberley, she says, is significant. In tourist season, travellers frequently leave behind critical scripts and medical details, while remote patients rely on infrequent visits from specialists who don’t always have up-to-date records. With digital health tools, these issues become a thing of the past. Safe, secure and centralised healthcare records also make it easier for remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities to stay on Country and access culturally appropriate care.</p> <p>“We know ‘one size fits all’ doesn’t work for everyone,” Mann says. “People and communities get left behind unless solutions are flexible enough to be adaptable to different communities, different patient cohorts, different settings.”</p> <p>For Mann and the healthcare providers with whom she talks every day, these digital tools are a step towards such a solution. Ultimately, she says, My Health Record, my health app, electronic prescriptions and the Active Script List help to improve the service she offers. </p> <p>“I know that I’m making good clinical decisions,” she says. “I know I’m supplying the patient with the correct medication, and I know that I’m doing my best because I actually have the current and relevant information I need to provide good care.”</p> <p><em><strong><a href="https://www.digitalhealth.gov.au/initiatives-and-programs/my-health-record/whats-inside" rel="nofollow">Keep your key health information securely in one place; get started with My Health Record today.</a></strong></em></p>
