---
title: >-
  Ellen DeGeneres’ Oscars selfie: was this the moment pop culture shattered into
  a billion pieces?
slug: >-
  ellen-degeneres-oscars-selfie-was-this-the-moment-pop-culture-shattered-into-a-b
category: Society
difficulty: Short Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p>When DeGeneres posted her A-list snap at the 2014 Academy Awards, it made a
  splash. But it was probably the end of monoculture – and now we’re all alone
  in our TikTok bubbles</p>
word_count: 633
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C1
---
<p><strong>Name:</strong> The Oscars selfie.</p> <p><strong>Age:</strong> Once upon a time (2 March 2014, to be precise), at the Oscars, the actor Bradley Cooper, who was nominated for best supporting actor, <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/04/ellens-oscars-selfie-that-went-viral-not-marketing-stunt-samsung-insists">took a selfie</a> with the host, Ellen DeGeneres, and a whole load of A-listers …</p> <p><strong>Remind me who featured.</strong> Meryl Streep, Julia Roberts, Angelina Jolie, Brad Pitt, Lupita Nyong’o, Jennifer Lawrence.</p> <p><strong>Ah yes, a stellar lineup!</strong><strong> But, back to the </strong><strong>question of age: so </strong><strong>the Oscars selfie is</strong><strong> 12 years old</strong><strong>?</strong> Correct.</p> <p><strong>And we’re talking about it now because …</strong> according to a recent <a href="https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/business/digital/monoculture-died-2014-1236545688/">essay in the Hollywood Reporter</a>, this selfie represented the beginning of the end for monoculture.</p> <p><strong>In farming?</strong> No, not in farming. Monoculture as in a shared popular culture, a cultural moment dominated by one single element.</p> <p><strong>Everyone huddling around the TV to watch the Apollo 11 moon landing, or the wedding of Charles and Diana, or the finale of Friends – that sort of thing?</strong> Bingo, when everyone had fewer channels on TV. Though all of those examples pre-date the social media age, unlike the Oscars selfie, which arrived at a time when social media platforms were in their ascendancy and broadcast audiences (in the US, at least) for award shows were still pretty strong. </p> <p><strong>OK, </strong><strong>give me some numbers to back this up</strong><strong>. </strong>The TV audience for the Oscars in 2014 was 43.74 million …</p> <p><strong>And now?</strong> <a href="https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/tv/tv-news/oscars-2026-tv-ratings-1236534637/">It has sunk to about 18 million</a>. That’s only half the story, though. The Oscars selfie was posted on DeGeneres’ Twitter account, and the tweet was retweeted more than any tweet had ever been retweeted before.</p> <p><strong>Everyone saw it, in other words?</strong> The show, the tweet – everyone saw. Hence the argument that the whole of 2014 – and the Oscars selfie in particular – represents the peak of monoculture.</p> <p><strong>What happened afterwards?</strong> Choice. The explosion of streaming platforms for music and filmed media. Just last year, Netflix alone <a href="https://www.whats-on-netflix.com/news/netflix-library-by-the-numbers-2025-597-new-originals-released-and-library-swells-to-almost-8000-titles/">released 597 new originals</a>. Now you’ve also got Disney+, Apple TV, Prime Video and HBO. Not to mention YouTube and TikTok, which <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2025/12/09/well/family/tik-tok-you-tube-teen-use-pew-study.html">occupy so much of our media time</a>.</p> <p><strong>Anything else?</strong> Well, the pandemic in the 2020s also caused a sharp decline in shared spaces and experiences, both literal and in terms of media consumption. Not to mention the rise of algorithmic scrolling that personalises the content we consume.</p> <p><strong>Net result: popular culture shatters into a billion pieces, like a Ming vase dropped from a height on to concrete. </strong>If you like. Certainly we’re unlikely to get 40 million watching an awards ceremony, then sharing a star-studded selfie from the event.</p> <p><strong>What is there to talk about at the water cooler?</strong> Exactly!</p> <p><strong>Do say:</strong> “Mmm, isn’t this water lovely and cool?”</p> <p><strong>Don’t say:</strong> “Sorry, can’t talk. I’m too busy scrolling through never-ending content tailored to my own algorithm, and probably generated by AI …”</p>
