---
title: Environment groups are anything but ‘mute’ on the planning bill
slug: environment-groups-are-anything-but-mute-on-the-planning-bill
category: Environment
difficulty: Short Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p><strong>Craig Bennett</strong>, <strong>Hilary McGrady</strong>,<strong> Dr
  James Robinson </strong>and<strong> Richard Benwell</strong> say they have
  never stopped campaigning on the planning and infrastructure bill’s flaws</p>
word_count: 504
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C1
---
<p>George Monbiot is both right and wrong in his article on the planning and infrastructure bill (<a href="https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2025/oct/16/labour-england-nature-housing-planning-bill">Wage war on nature to build new homes: that’s Labour’s offer, but it’s a con trick, 16 October</a>). He is right that there is no choice to be made between nature and housing and that both are essential. He is right that the repeated demonisation of wildlife by some in government is both inaccurate and against the deepest instincts of the British public. He is right that the planning and infrastructure bill has been spun into this narrative and that parts of it represent a huge risk for nature. But he is wrong that environment NGOs have been “mute” in response.</p> <p>Collectively and individually, we have repeatedly called out the bill publicly in the media and elsewhere, including the damaging <a href="https://bills.parliament.uk/publications/62769/documents/7082">part 3 proposals</a> and the shambolic last-minute government amendments. We have compiled hundreds of briefings, evidence and research papers highlighting the dangers within the bill and opportunities to improve it, and urged action. We have worked with our indefatigable supporters, who have sent over 100,000 emails, letters and postcards to their MPs and the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government.</p> <p>This work led to a large package of amendments that, while by no means perfect, improved part 3 of the bill, with the Office for Environmental Protection describing them as going “a long way towards addressing the issues we raised in our advice”.</p> <p>We have never stopped campaigning on the bill’s flaws and we will continue to challenge where this bill could harm nature in its final stages and in implementation.</p> <p>With rumours of a second planning bill also on the horizon, we will continue to do everything in our power to galvanise our supporters and to stop the environmentally, economically and&nbsp;politically disastrous assault on&nbsp;the wild spaces we all cherish. <br><strong>Craig Bennett </strong><em>Chief executive, The Wildlife Trusts</em><br><strong>Hilary McGrady </strong><em>Director-general, National Trust</em><br><strong>Dr James Robinson </strong><em>Chief operating officer, RSPB</em><br><strong>Richard Benwell </strong><em>CEO,&nbsp;Wildlife and Countryside Link</em></p> <p><strong><em>• Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please </em></strong><a href="mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com?body=Please%20include%20your%20name,%20full%20postal%20address%20and%20phone%20number%20with%20your%20letter%20below.%20Letters%20are%20usually%20published%20with%20the%20author%27s%20name%20and%20city/town/village.%20The%20rest%20of%20the%20information%20is%20for%20verification%20only%20and%20to%20contact%20you%20where%20necessary."><strong><em>email</em></strong></a><strong><em> us your letter and it will be considered for publication in our </em></strong><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters"><strong><em>letters</em></strong></a><strong><em> section.</em></strong></p>
