---
title: How online schools are tackling barriers to education
slug: how-online-schools-are-tackling-barriers-to-education
category: education
difficulty: Evening Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p>Immersive lessons and flexible qualifications: the support, innovation and
  personalisation of online schooling is helping students who had negative
  experiences at bricks-and-mortar institutions</p>
word_count: 828
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C1
---
<p>Moving to any new school can be daunting, but joining an online school is a whole new experience. For James, starting at <a href="https://kingsinterhigh.co.uk/" rel="nofollow">King’s InterHigh</a> was a bit scary at first, but it soon became the best school he had ever been to. “The first weeks are a bit different, but once you get used to it, I think it’s even better than a physical school,” he says. King’s InterHigh, an online school, uses advanced technology to create a flexible learning experience for students all around the world.</p> <p>Once James enrolled at King’s InterHigh, which follows a British curriculum for students aged seven to 19, he says he was supported straight away. “It’s very welcoming,” he says. James is studying the international baccalaureate (IB) diploma online as his family didn’t want him to have to change schools due to relocations. He says his initial nerves were quickly put to rest. “They have these welcome meetings where they explain everything,” he says. Students can also do their GCSEs and A-levels at the school.</p> <p>One of the benefits of an online school is the ability to create an inclusive and welcoming space for a wide range of students. “There are a variety of students from all over the world,” James says.</p> <p>Online learning can mean young people living in rural communities, those facing mental health issues or students who need a quieter learning environment don’t get left behind. </p>    <p>Classes at King’s InterHigh are available across three time zones – the UK, the Middle East and south-east Asia. The UK timetable has three terms that follow traditional UK independent school timings, however there is also the flexibility to start at any time in the year – helpful for families who have to relocate or students who are struggling and need to switch schools quickly. Classes run in real time and are recorded and available to watch 24/7 for flexibility.</p> <p>Studying online in this way can be uniquely positive for students with special educational needs. James, who has dyslexia, says he has found King’s InterHigh supportive. “We have a whole department and teachers are usually very understanding. If I need more time, I can just tell them, and they will arrange the lessons so that I have more time.”</p>    <p>Past student Lucy, who has Tourette syndrome and autism, says she felt welcomed and supported at King’s InterHigh. In fact, starting there was “the best thing that ever happened to (her)”. Lucy struggled when she first began secondary school, where she was bullied. “I felt like I was completely incapable of learning,” she says. But at this school, the flexibility to rewatch lessons at her own pace, as well as having supportive teachers, meant she was able to enjoy learning, moving up a year group in English and making lots of new friends. “King’s InterHigh changed my outlook on learning,” she says. “It was amazing – I loved it so much.”</p> <p>Other students and parents have had similar experiences. Joanne Smith turned to King’s InterHigh after her daughter faced bullying and mental health challenges elsewhere. “She was attacked in school, and it was traumatic for her,” Smith says. But at this school, she says her daughter was able to feel safe.</p> <p>As an online school, teachers make lessons engaging and immersive using interactive tools such as moderated virtual reality and augmented reality as well as bringing content to life with Q&amp;As and polls. “We have completely different opportunities online,” says James. “The teacher can create a multiple-choice poll and, rather than just one pupil answering (a question), everyone has to answer and the teacher can give feedback.”</p>    <p>As well as helping students to learn, the digital environment equips them with life skills that are useful outside of school. “Especially as the world is advancing and we are all using computers, I think online students will have an advantage because they are used to using computers more,” James says.</p> <p>Many students find that the unique opportunities offered by an online school such as King’s InterHigh improves their confidence and their schooling experience. For Lucy, it was the only place that worked for her. “In total, I went to about six secondary schools, and King’s InterHigh was the only one I could succeed at,” she says.</p> <p>James believes that the high quality of teaching and the global outlook gave him a superior education. “I can join classes from everywhere,” he says. “My learning has totally improved.”</p> <p><em>Find out more about <a href="https://kingsinterhigh.co.uk/?utm_source=guardian&amp;utm_medium=feature2&amp;utm_campaign=2025" rel="nofollow">King’s InterHigh</a> and how its innovative, personalised approach to schooling makes a world of difference</em></p>
