---
title: ‘I’d introduce aliens to shito sauce.’ Items our panel would take into space
slug: i-d-introduce-aliens-to-shito-sauce-items-our-panel-would-take-into-space
category: space
difficulty: Evening Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p>Artemis II’s astronauts packed their wedding rings, notebooks and a supply
  of maple syrup. Here’s what our writers would fly to the moon</p>
word_count: 1294
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C2
---
<h2>A purple cloth alien to remind me of my daughter’s love</h2> <p><a data-contributor-rel="author" href="/profile/maggie-aderin-pocock" data-ignore="global-link-styling">Maggie Aderin</a></p>  <p>The item I would take with me to the moon would be a <strong>little alien that my daughter made</strong> for me. She is studying textiles for GCSE and she used a loom to make a beautiful piece of purple cloth, my favourite colour. She then sewed this into a little alien creature. I would love to take this with me because the moon would be the furthest the creature would get from Earth. I smile every time I look at it and see the love that my daughter poured into it.</p> <p>Space scientist and CEO of Science Innovation Ltd</p> <h2>Great works of writing and music would strengthen my brain</h2> <p><a data-contributor-rel="author" href="/profile/sheila-hancock" data-ignore="global-link-styling">Sheila Hancock</a></p>  <p>I care little nowadays for personal possessions but, as time is running out for me and I am achingly aware of my ignorance, I will use my moon trip to educate myself, so that I come back a more cultured Guardian reader. The <strong>complete works of Shakespeare</strong> will cover the theatre at its most profound. <strong>War and Peace</strong> will deal with great, daunting literature. And the <strong>complete symphonies of Mahler</strong> as conducted by their supreme interpreter, <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jan/20/claudio-abbado">Claudio Abbado</a>, will help me look death in the face. I hope the journey working on these will strengthen my weakening brain’s capability, and inspire me to continue to relish the genius of the human animal when I return to its natural habitat.</p> <p>Actor and writer</p> <h2>A trip to the moon would be a chance to read old birthday cards</h2> <p><a data-contributor-rel="author" href="/profile/michael-akadiri" data-ignore="global-link-styling">Michael Akadiri</a></p>  <p>I’m not even a frequent flyer of planes – yet if I boarded a spaceship and blasted off like Team Rocket, there are three items I know I’d have in tow. First, a spaceship-load of <strong>old birthday cards</strong>. Family and friends tend to pen the most wholesome and loving monologues that I read once before banishing them to the loft. A trip to the moon would be a welcome chance to reminisce. In lieu of the notes app on my phone, I’d bring an <strong>old</strong><strong>-school notepad</strong>. I’d need to keep a contemporaneous account of my thoughts and feelings – for example, what words did I scream during takeoff? Do calories count in space? On Earth, it’s gravity that is literally weighing us down, right? So I’d treat myself to a <strong>handful of </strong><strong><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/food/2025/mar/03/puff-puff-nigerian-doughnuts-recipe-by-jess-and-jo-edun">puff-</a></strong><strong><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/food/2025/mar/03/puff-puff-nigerian-doughnuts-recipe-by-jess-and-jo-edun">puff</a></strong> (Nigerian donuts). Just don’t tell my personal trainer.</p> <p>Standup comedian and resident doctor</p> <h2>Things to remind me of my past would keep me warm</h2> <p><a data-contributor-rel="author" href="/profile/michaelrosen" data-ignore="global-link-styling">Michael Rosen</a></p>  <p>I think when I’m up there I’ll need a favourite taste, a reminder of the past and a reminder of my wife. So this is what I would take. <strong>Giant yellow Chilean raisins</strong> from <a href="https://londonist.com/london/features/w-martyn-muswell-hill">W Martyn’s shop</a> in Muswell Hill, London. These are chewy, not too sweet, with a slight touch of citric. I tell children that I eat so many of them that I’ve become Michael Raisin. The <strong>oval brown pebble</strong> I keep from the back alley where I spent the first 16 years of my life, living in a flat over a shop. It was the only route into our flat, and the site of great cup finals and Test matches, as it were. The <strong>“furry”, as we called it</strong>, that my wife brought into hospital in 2020<strong>, </strong>after I had been <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/books/2020/sep/30/michael-rosen-on-his-covid-19-coma-it-felt-like-a-pre-death-a-nothingness">on a ventilator</a> with coronavirus. It’s a blanket. I was cold all the time, and the things they called blankets – which I thought were sheets – didn’t keep me warm.</p> <p>Children’s author and broadcaster</p> <h2>Contact by Carl Sagan would help me with any alien encounters</h2> <p><a data-contributor-rel="author" href="/profile/athena-kugblenu" data-ignore="global-link-styling">Athena Kugblenu</a></p>  <p>Undoubtedly I would pack a <strong>pair of Crocs</strong>. The true giant leap for mankind has been the embrace of comfort and convenience over style. <strong><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/books/2023/mar/15/top-10-visionary-books-about-scientists-martin-macinnes-in-ascension">Contact by Carl Sagan</a></strong> is more a handbook than a novel. I think that would be a handy guide for me, should aliens decide to get in touch. Finally a <strong>jar of </strong><strong>shito</strong>, a <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/23/ghanaian-fish-and-chips-recipe-zoe-adjonyoh-cook-residency#:~:text=Shito%20(hot%20pepper%20sauce)">Ghanaian condiment</a> made of shrimp, tomato and pepper. It’s delicious, though I don’t eat it any more on account of my veganism. But I’d appreciate extraterrestrials learning about shito before they learn about English profanity. Less explaining to do later.</p> <p>Writer and comedian</p> <h2>Gil Scott-Heron would inspire me with his cynicism</h2> <p><a data-contributor-rel="author" href="/profile/nelson-abbey" data-ignore="global-link-styling">Nels Abbey</a></p>  <p>If I have been dispatched to the moon, that means only one thing: they got me. I have been conscripted. To protect my sanity, stability and integrity (in addition to overcoming the multiple obstacles of claustrophobia, motion sickness and a fear of heights), I would take with me a collection of inspirational thoughts from some of the world’s most successful cynics. Gil Scott-Heron’s <strong><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/science/2019/jul/14/apollo-11-civil-rights-black-america-moon">Whitey </a></strong><strong><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/science/2019/jul/14/apollo-11-civil-rights-black-america-moon">on </a></strong><strong><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/science/2019/jul/14/apollo-11-civil-rights-black-america-moon">the Moon</a></strong> perhaps: “A rat done bit my sister Nell / (With Whitey on the moon) / Her face and arms began to swell / (And Whitey’s on the moon) / I can’t pay no doctor bills / (But Whitey’s on the moon) / Ten years from now I’ll be payin’ still / (While Whitey’s on the moon)”. Standup routines on race and space by the great comedian <strong>Paul Mooney</strong> would also make the trip. White space officials can brush off the misfortune of losing a multimillion-dollar space probe or two, he said, and be forgiven. But a black Nasa official would quickly be bundled into a rocket ship: “Go find the space probe,” they’d tell him. “Don’t come back if you don’t find it.” That’s the only reason I can see that they’d send me.</p> <p>Writer and broadcaster</p>
