---
title: >-
  ‘It has become difficult to live’: Hungarian writers bemoan country’s hostile
  environment
slug: >-
  it-has-become-difficult-to-live-hungarian-writers-bemoan-country-s-hostile-envir
category: Environment
difficulty: Evening Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p>Nobel prize for László Krasznahorkai provides a rare glimpse of unity in a
  nation divided on party lines</p>
word_count: 1051
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C2
---
<p>Gyula, a tranquil and picturesque town in the east of Hungary, is best known for its sausages. It has no direct rail connection to Budapest, but it does have a library and a castle. Soon, it will also have an official copy of a Nobel medal.</p> <p>“Congratulations to László Krasznahorkai, the first Nobel winner from Gyula,” proclaim billboards in the town, paying tribute to the 71-year-old writer who <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/books/2025/oct/09/laszlo-krasznahorkai-wins-the-nobel-prize-in-literature-2025">won this year’s Nobel prize in literature</a> for “his compelling and visionary oeuvre.”.</p> <p>In December, as he accepted the medal at the Swedish Academy in Stockholm, many compatriots watched live, including an audience gathered in Gyula’s wood-panelled library. The town marked the occasion with a week-long programme of readings, workshops and an exhibition dedicated to Hungarian Nobel laureates.</p> <p>The author himself was absent – and not just because he was accepting the award. Like many Hungarian artists and writers these days, Krasznahorkai no longer lives in his home country.</p> <p>As it prepares for its toughest re-election campaign since winning power in 2010, Viktor Orbán’s far-right Fidesz government is presiding over an increasingly hostile and repressive climate, say authors and rights groups. The state has taken control of one of the country’s largest publishers, homophobic legislation has reshaped bookshops and writers complain of shrinking opportunities.</p> <p>In an interview with the Swedish broadcaster SVT to mark his Nobel prize, Krasznahorkai likened Hungary to an alcoholic parent. “My mother drinks, she loses her beauty, she fights,” he said. “Still, I love her.”</p> <p>Many Hungarian intellectuals have emigrated. Gergely Péterfy, an award-winning author, is among them: he moved to the south of Italy, where he set up an artists’ community. The move, he said, was driven partly by curiosity and a love of the Mediterranean lifestyle, but also by politics. “In the past 15 years, it has become very difficult to live in Hungary because of Orbán’s anti-culture stance,” he said.</p> <p>Since Fidesz came to power, governmental actors have gained control of universities, galleries and popular media outlets. The national cultural fund, chaired by the culture and innovation minister, has redirected money from independent unions and periodicals to pro-government journalists and writers.</p> <p>Those independent literary outlets that remain are struggling to survive amid growing state influence over advertisers, leaving publications with less revenue and unable to adequately pay contributors.</p>    <p>“I don’t know any young writer [in Hungary] who makes a living,” said Csenge Enikő Élő, a 32-year-old author.</p> <p>Élő writes prose and poetry, and her first book was published last year by an independent publisher. She complains of the polarisation of literature: “One side is getting a disproportionately large amount of funding, and the other very little.”</p> <p>The Fidesz government has also poured hundreds of billions of forints into Mathias Corvinus Collegium, a conservative educational institution chaired by Orbán’s political director, which has several international outposts and its own publishing house.</p> <p><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/jun/23/authors-leave-hungarian-publisher-in-protest-at-sale-to-orban-linked-college">In 2023</a>, MCC acquired 98.5% of the shares in Libri, Hungary’s leading publisher and bookshop chain. The same summer, Libri’s shops <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/jul/12/hungarian-bookstore-chain-wraps-books-lgbtq-characters-plastic">wrapped books in plastic</a> if they depicted same-sex relationships, corresponding to Fidesz’s “child protection” law, which prohibits the promotion and display of homosexuality and gender reassignment.</p> <p>“A significant portion of literary works were effectively banned for the sake of a political campaign,” said Krisztián Nyáry, a writer and creative director of Líra, the country’s second-largest bookshop chain and publishing group. Líra has been fined multiple times for defying the anti-LGBTQ law, and is contesting the penalties in national and international courts.</p> <p>While Nyáry finds reassurance in the fact that Libri employs the same people as before MCC’s acquisition, he is still wary. “There are Chekhovian rifles hanging on the wall here. No one has fired them yet, but we know that if there’s a rifle on stage, sooner or later someone will fire it,” he said.</p>    <p>The Fidesz government has been criticised for favouring rightwing and controversial writers, incorporating them into the national curriculum and seeking their official recognition.</p> <p>In 2020, teaching unions expressed outrage when the state’s list of mandatory texts included the work of József Nyírő, who was a member of Hungary’s far-right government during the second world war, but excluded Imre Kertész, a Holocaust survivor and the country’s first Nobel literature laureate.</p> <p>By contrast, the government had made little effort to promote Krasznahorkai internationally, said János Szegő, his editor. But although Krasznahorkai is critical of the government, describing it in a recent interview as “a psychiatric case” because of its ambivalent stance on Russian and Ukraine, his prize was celebrated all around the country, regardless of party lines.</p> <p>“It makes one’s heart skip a beat when a person of Hungarian descent receives the Nobel,” said Szegő. “It’s a great confirmation for a small language that’s always wary of extinction.”</p> <p>Ernő Görgényi, the Fidesz mayor of the writer’s home town, said: “For us, as a community, the greatest recognition is that the books that feature locations and people from Gyula have now made their way on to the bookshelves around the world.” </p> <p>His administration will install a plaque on the house in which Krasznahorkai grew up, and name a school library after him. Eventually, it plans to organise Krasznahorkai-themed tours around the city, inspired by Dublin’s Ulysses walk.</p> <p>“There’s no need to bring politics into this,” said Márta Becsiné Szabó, 75, a resident of Gyula who took part in the town’s Nobel celebrations. “The important thing is that he is from Gyula, and that he is Hungarian.”</p>
