---
title: >-
  Police record nearly fiftyfold rise in stalking offences in England and Wales
  in past decade
slug: >-
  police-record-nearly-fiftyfold-rise-in-stalking-offences-in-england-and-wales-in
category: Science & Technology
difficulty: Evening Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p>Increased recognition of crime and perpetrators using technology to track
  victims are behind rise, say experts</p>
word_count: 841
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C2
---
<p>The number of stalking offences recorded by police has soared over the past decade, with experts saying the rise has been driven by increased recognition, and technology making it easier for perpetrators to track their victims.</p> <p>House of Commons library data analysed by the Liberal Democrats found more than 135,000 offences were recorded last year, up from just under 3,000 10 years ago.</p> <p>Significant increases were recorded in every part of England and Wales, with some of the country’s largest forces recording huge rises.</p> <p>The Metropolitan police recorded 11,798 offences last year, up from 647 10 years ago, while Greater Manchester police saw a rise from 96 to 10,649 over the same period.</p> <p>At the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS), the number of offences leading to charges increased from 2,305 in 2020-21 to 6,790 in 2024-25 – the highest on record.</p> <p>A CPS spokesperson said: “Stalking offences charged by the CPS have more than doubled in the last five years and reached an all-time high last year. We know that as more of our lives are lived online, the way stalkers offend is changing. Even when abuse is digital, the harm it causes for victims is very real.</p> <p>“Last month, the CPS launched its first stalking action plan, specifically designed to tackle the evolving nature of the offence in the digital age. We are working with tech and trauma experts to equip our prosecutors with the tools they need to deliver justice for as many victims as possible.”</p>  <figure class="element element-interactive interactive" data-interactive="https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/iframe-wrapper/0.1/boot.js" data-canonical-url="https://interactive.guim.co.uk/datawrapper/embed/1TckQ/1/" data-alt="Recorded stalking offences in England and Wales, thousands"> <a href="https://interactive.guim.co.uk/datawrapper/embed/1TckQ/1/">Interactive</a> </figure>  <p>Almost half of those contacting a specialist helpline run the Suzy Lamplugh Trust charity reported being stalked by an ex-partner, while many others knew the perpetrator.</p> <p>Jo Silver, the interim CEO at the charity SafeLives said: “Stalking is often part of domestic abuse, especially after a relationship has ended, and it can be a clear warning sign that risk is escalating.</p> <p>“Technology is making this even easier. Abuse is evolving, meaning perpetrators can now track, monitor and harass victims in ways that mean abuse does not only exist in physical spaces. Stalking is a common feature of post-separation abuse and can have a devastating impact on someone’s sense of safety.”</p> <p>Silver added: “The rise in recorded offences is concerning, but it’s likely to reflect a combination of factors, including improved awareness and changes in how these crimes are identified and recorded.</p> <p>“In some cases, behaviours that may previously have been recorded differently are now being recognised as stalking by the police. What matters now is that the response keeps pace. Stalking needs to be understood as part of a pattern of coercive and controlling behaviour, with agencies working together to spot risk early and act quickly.”</p> <p>The Liberal Democrats are calling for emergency stalking protection notices <strong>–</strong> similar to those used for domestic abuse <strong>–</strong> so police have the powers to take action immediately.</p> <p>Silver said such measures had a role to play within a “wider, joined-up approach” that included “independent stalking advocates, domestic abuse services, and specialist victim support organisations”.</p> <p>Marie Goldman, the Liberal Democrats’ women and equalities spokesperson, said: “Stalking causes untold damage to the lives of victims and can have a detrimental impact on both the mental and physical health of individuals, leaving them and their loved ones living in constant fear. </p> <p>“These figures show the terrifying scale of the issue here in Britain. We need to stamp out the stalking epidemic which is sweeping the country by ensuring those responsible for this predatory and intimidating behaviour are held accountable and face the full force of the law.”</p> <p>A National Police Chiefs’ Council spokesperson said that “policing and the wider criminal justice system must recognise the damage and harm perpetrators cause and protect victims at the earliest opportunity”, adding: “This is especially true in a world where new technology is giving perpetrators more opportunities to carry out their offending.”</p> <p>They said the behaviour of perpetrators was complex, and that “prevention and early intervention is crucial to stopping harmful behaviour from escalating”.</p> <p>“We know stalking has been historically under-reported, with the increase in recorded offences in part down to an increase in public awareness of stalking, which is mirrored in an increased awareness and improved response within policing,” the spokesperson said.</p> <p>“This includes ensuring the right questions are asked by call handlers to identify stalking early, ensuring stalking protection orders are considered in all stalking cases, and at the earliest opportunity, and ongoing work with the Home Office and Crown Prosecution Service to ensure the whole criminal justice response to stalking is strengthened.”</p>
