---
title: Princess of Wales says nature ‘helped me heal’ in 44th birthday video
slug: princess-of-wales-says-nature-helped-me-heal-in-44th-birthday-video
category: nature
difficulty: Evening Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p>Catherine says she feels deeply grateful in final instalment of Mother
  Nature series a year on from cancer treatment</p>
word_count: 802
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C1
---
<p>The power of nature has been a huge theme for the Princess of Wales in the year since <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2025/jan/14/princess-of-wales-visits-london-hospital-treated-cancer-royal-marsden">her announcement that she was in remission from cancer</a>.</p> <p>Now, on her 44th birthday, she has embraced it again, reflecting in <a href="https://x.com/KensingtonRoyal/status/2009558408475656434">a short video</a> on how deeply grateful she is, how important it is to be at one with nature and its power to heal.</p> <p>Entitled Winter, it is the fourth and final instalment of her Mother Nature series released on social media, in which she has shared personal thoughts and encouraging messages on the changing seasons, each one giving a glimpse of what has sustained and supported her during her cancer journey.</p> <p>In an accompanying post she said: “The Mother Nature series has been a deeply personal, creative reflection on how nature has helped me heal. But it is also a story about the power of nature and creativity in collective healing.”</p>    <p>The latest video shows winter scenes in the UK as she narrates: “Even in the coldest, darkest season, winter has a way of bringing us stillness, patience and quiet consideration.</p> <p>“Where the stream slows just enough for us to see our own reflection. To discover the deepest parts of ourselves. Alongside the whispers in the pulse of every living thing.</p> <p>“I find myself reflecting on how deeply grateful I am. For the rivers within us flow with ease, fears washed away, cleanse and purify. Come to peace with our tears and discover what it means to be alive.</p> <p>“To be at one with nature; a quiet teacher and a soft voice that guides. In memory. Helping us to heal.”</p>  <figure class="element element-tweet" data-canonical-url="https://twitter.com/KensingtonRoyal/status/2009558408475656434">  <blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">The Mother Nature series has been a deeply personal, creative reflection on how nature has helped me heal. But it is also a story about the power of nature and creativity in collective healing.<br> <br>There is so much we can learn from mother nature, as we look to build a happier,… <a href="https://t.co/yZ3u6yLEe4">pic.twitter.com/yZ3u6yLEe4</a></p>&mdash; The Prince and Princess of Wales (@KensingtonRoyal) <a href="https://twitter.com/KensingtonRoyal/status/2009558408475656434?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">January 9, 2026</a></blockquote> </figure>  <p>The Mother Nature video series began with Spring and a special message for Mother’s Day after her cancer diagnosis and course of preventive chemotherapy. She posted then: “Over the past year, nature has been our sanctuary.</p> <p>“This Mother’s Day, let us celebrate Mother Nature and recognise how our bond with the natural world can help not only nurture our inner selves, but remind us too of the role we play within the rich tapestry of life.”</p> <p>The video featured footage of natural environments across the UK, shots of her touching a tree and of her and Prince William walking dogs in Norfolk.</p> <p>Her Summer video encouraged people to “cherish the bonds of love and friendship” and to “embrace the joy to be found in even the most fleeting of moments and shared experiences.”</p> <p>The Autumn theme embraced the “beauty of change” as she reflected on the season as a time of deeper connection. The video showed her around a bonfire in Windsor Great Park outdoor cooking with schoolchildren.</p>    <p>The final video, in which she narrates over winter scenes including woodlands, mountains and a murmuration of starlings over the sea, was released days before the first anniversary of her announcement at the start of 2025 that she was in remission from cancer. She has since talked often about her strong belief in nature’s role in improving mental and physical health.</p> <p>“There is so much we can learn from Mother Nature as we look to build a happier, healthier world,” she said in her post.</p> <p>Catherine underwent major abdominal surgery in January 2024 after which doctors found evidence of cancer. She announced the news personally in a video message that March.</p> <p>She revealed she had completed treatment in September that year, and said her recovery and return to royal duties would be slow but steady.</p> <p>The Winter video was released on Friday, a day after she made a surprise appearance at Charing Cross hospital to show support for under-pressure NHS staff. She and the Prince of Wales surprised volunteers and NHS staff on a tea break as they carried out their first engagement of 2026.</p>
