---
title: Streeting relaunches women’s health strategy to tackle ‘medical misogyny’
slug: streeting-relaunches-women-s-health-strategy-to-tackle-medical-misogyny
category: Health
difficulty: Evening Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p>Health secretary says NHS is ‘failing women’ and pledges to end
  ‘gaslighting’ by doctors</p>
word_count: 833
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C2
---
<p>Wes Streeting has vowed to stop women being “gaslit” by doctors as he relaunches the women’s health strategy for England.</p> <p>Speaking before the publication of the renewed strategy on Wednesday, Streeting said the NHS was “failing women” and set out measures to help them access the healthcare they need.</p> <p>The government said the strategy would include a new standard of care to ensure women were offered pain relief for invasive procedures, such as fitting a contraceptive coil and hysteroscopies.</p> <p> Feedback would be directly linked to provider funding via a new trial, giving women more power to effect change if they have a poor experience.</p> <p>Action would also be taken to ensure women no longer face long waits for diagnoses for conditions such as endometriosis, which can take a decade to diagnose.</p> <p>A <a href="https://committees.parliament.uk/committee/328/women-and-equalities-committee/news/212280/improving-menstrual-health-must-be-prioritised-in-womens-health-strategy-and-wider-nhs-reforms-wec-says/">report last month</a> by the women and equalities committee found that gynaecological and menstrual health had not been “sufficiently prioritised” by the government.</p> <p>MPs said parts of the 10-year women’s health strategy, <a href="https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/womens-health-strategy-for-england/womens-health-strategy-for-england">launched in 2022</a> by the Conservatives, were at risk of being scaled back or discontinued under wider changes to the NHS. These included initiatives that had reduced waiting lists and improved women’s access to healthcare, such as women’s health hubs.</p> <aside class="element element-rich-link element--thumbnail"> <p> <span>Related: </span><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/society/2026/apr/19/the-fight-against-medical-misogyny-has-a-long-way-to-go">The fight against medical misogyny has a long way to go </a> </p> </aside>  <p>Sarah Owen, the chair of the committee and a Labour MP, said: “This would be a disaster for girls’ and women’s menstrual healthcare, when it is in dire need of more support.</p> <p>“It is a national scandal that nearly half a million women are on hospital gynaecology waiting lists when there are effective treatments that could be administered in primary and community care, if only they could access them.”</p> <p>The report <a href="https://committees.parliament.uk/committee/328/women-and-equalities-committee/news/212280/improving-menstrual-health-must-be-prioritised-in-womens-health-strategy-and-wider-nhs-reforms-wec-says/">said women faced “medical misogyny”</a> and were left to “suck it up” and suffer in pain for years because of a lack of awareness of women’s health conditions.</p> <p>Streeting said: “[Women] have for so long been let down by a healthcare system that too often gaslights women, treating their pain as an inconvenience and their symptoms as an overreaction.”</p> <p>He added: “Whether it’s being passed from one appointment to another for conditions like endometriosis and fibroids, or a lack of proper pain relief during invasive procedures, through to having to navigate symptoms for years before receiving a diagnosis, it’s clear the system is failing women.</p> <p>“Women’s voices must be central to delivering effective, respectful and empathetic care. We need to hit medical misogyny where it hurts – the wallet. Today’s renewed strategy will tackle the issues women face every day and ensure no woman is left fighting to be heard.”</p> <p>Other plans include a £1m menstrual education programme to ensure girls are better equipped to recognise the difference between healthy and unhealthy periods.</p> <p>A redesign of clinical pathways for some women’s health issues will aim to speed up diagnosis and treatment, and there will be a review of support for families who experience repeated baby loss.</p> <p>The government also promised a “single referral point” to ensure women were directed to the right place the first time they sought help.</p> <p>Dr Sue Mann, NHS England’s women’s health director, said too many women were dismissed for “serious symptoms” that affected every part of their lives. “The renewed women’s health strategy will build significantly on the work the NHS has been doing to ensure women are heard and get the specialist care they need,” she said.</p> <p>Women’s health groups cautiously welcomed the renewed strategy. Emma Cox, the chief executive of Endometriosis UK, said decisive action would be vital to improve women’s healthcare in England.</p> <div class="element element-callout" data-campaign-id="25ded6f4-6ac7-4d5a-9553-7a9ae417eaf5" > </div>  <p>• This article was amended on 15 April 2026. An earlier version said that women could have the power to withhold payment for paid-for health services if they have a poor experience. To clarify, this is a trial powered by patient feedback that directly links to provider funding, and is for some NHS services, not paid-for options.</p>
