---
title: Sweetcorn is a delicious summer crop – if you have space in your garden
slug: sweetcorn-is-a-delicious-summer-crop-if-you-have-space-in-your-garden
category: space
difficulty: Short Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p>You’ll need a large area and a sunny aspect, but this plant is a true
  delight when homegrown </p>
word_count: 586
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C2
---
<p>If you read my recent <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2026/apr/03/when-celeriac-sow-grow-gardening">piece about celeriac,</a> you’ll know that I’m trying to make an effort to write about crops that I don’t actually grow myself – this is my next instalment. Unlike celeriac, which I don’t like, I don’t grow sweetcorn because I simply don’t have the right space and conditions. So if you’re fortunate to have the room and sunny aspect for it to thrive, I’m jealous. When freshly plucked and shucked, homegrown sweetcorn is beyond delightful.</p> <p>As you might suspect, sweetcorn grows best during long, hot summers – so get your seeds started now as they’ll want some warmth to germinate (in a propagator ideally) and pleasant weather as they get growing. As with so many of the best summer crops, it likes fertile and moisture-retentive soil, and as much sun as the summer days have to offer. Seedlings more than 8cm tall are ready to be planted out, but resist putting your seedlings into the ground until the days are warm and the risk of frost is well passed. And keep some fleece handy to throw over them should the temperature drop unexpectedly.</p>  <aside class="element element-pullquote element--inline"> <blockquote> <p>Sweetcorn can grow up to two metres tall, so you might want to consider supporting them with a stake</p> </blockquote> </aside>  <p>An important aspect of growing sweetcorn is the spacing. It is wind-pollinated, and successful pollination is facilitated by planting in blocks of at least four by four plants with about 40cm between them (hence the need for the aforementioned space that I don’t have). If you don’t have the space either, and you’re happy to harvest small unpollinated cobs, you can grow sweetcorn in a row and closer together (at about 20cm). But in my humble opinion, baby corn isn’t worth the effort.</p> <aside class="element element-rich-link element--thumbnail"> <p> <span>Related: </span><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2026/apr/03/when-celeriac-sow-grow-gardening">Celeriac are not pretty – or to my taste – but if you’re a fan, start sowing now</a> </p> </aside>  <p>You need to position your sweetcorn so there’s enough of a breeze to encourage the pollen from the tassels that appear at the top of the plant to find the silks that protrude from the lower flowers. Each strand transforms into a kernel when pollinated, so you don’t want your plants in such an exposed position that they’re in danger of snapping should the wind pick up. Sweetcorn can grow up to 2m tall, so you might want to consider supporting them with a stake if they’re being jostled by strong winds.</p> <p>Sweetcorn will start to ripen from late summer into autumn. Once the silks at the ends of the cobs begin to turn brown, you can peel back the husk and burst a kernel to test for readiness. If the liquid that appears is clear, they need longer, but if it’s creamy, your cob is ready.</p> <p>Grasp the cob firmly and twist away from the stem. If the kernels are overripe, leave the cob on the plant for as long as possible, and then hang them up to dry out completely, at which point you can put on a good movie and make popcorn.</p>
