---
title: 'The psychology of giving: why giving to others makes us happy'
slug: the-psychology-of-giving-why-giving-to-others-makes-us-happy
category: Psychology
difficulty: Evening Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p>Giving doesn’t just help people experiencing disadvantage; it’s good for
  the giver, too</p>
word_count: 1064
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C2
---
<p>We all know how it feels to do something nice for someone else. Whether it’s shouting a friend a coffee or helping someone out with errands, we get joy from knowing we have made a day – or a life – a little bit easier.</p> <p>Michael Norton, a professor at Harvard Business School and the co-author of <a href="https://www.booktopia.com.au/happy-money-elizabeth-dunn/book/9781780743370.html" rel="nofollow">Happy Money: The New Science of Smarter Spending</a>, explains why giving to others is good for the giver.</p> <h2>We feel better when we do something for others</h2> <p>“We focus so much on the recipient of giving, as we should,” Norton says. “But sometimes we forget about the emotional experience of donors.</p> <p>“You will give so you feel better. It’s not clear in those [charity] ads that giving actually can be a positive experience that can make you happy. When we work with charities, we encourage them to think about not just tugging at the heartstrings but also framing it as: this benefits not only the recipient, but the donor themselves.”</p> <p>Marianne has been a regular donor to the Australian charity <a href="https://www.thesmithfamily.com.au/?utm_medium=affiliate&amp;utm_source=guardian&amp;utm_campaign=2025_back-to-school_content-partnerships-premium-article&amp;utm_term=think-piece&amp;utm_content=link1&amp;utm_creative_format=text&amp;utm_marketing_tactic=brand-awareness" rel="nofollow">The Smith Family</a> for more than 22 years. “It’s a wonderful organisation,” she says. “Helping disadvantaged kids is important.”</p> <p>She has seen first-hand the alienation children feel when they’re not like the other kids because of a different uniform, a school bag without the logo or worn shoes. “Anything that helps them to fit in and belong makes school easier. [A Smith Family donation] goes to support children, and frankly, they’re our future.”</p>    <p>Marianne’s background as a registered nurse and psychologist influenced her choice to donate to The Smith Family – and may partly explain why it gives her so much joy. “As a nurse, my work role is changing people’s lives,” she says. “[Donating to The Smith Family] is a natural extension of what I’ve been doing since I was a student.”</p> <p>Norton says a personal connection can boost the good feeling we get from giving, but it’s not essential. “One thing that’s helpful is giving to someone or a charity cause that is directly related to you,” he says. “However, it’s still the case that giving to a charity that you’re not connected to at all makes you happier than spending on yourself.”</p> <h2>Every little bit counts for our happiness</h2> <p>Different acts of kindness give us different feelings, Norton says. Treating a friend to lunch creates a more personal and immediate delight than tapping “Donate” on a screen. “We’re human; we like that stuff,” he says.</p> <p>Giving can bring much more happiness than spending the money on something else. “For example, buying yourself a coffee,” Norton says. “It’s not that buying a coffee makes you sad – it just doesn’t do much for you. It’s the millionth coffee you’ve had in your life, so why would it?”</p> <p>Narrowing down the exact reason is trickier. “If we say to people, ‘Did you know that giving can make you happy?’, they’re like, ‘Why did you need to do science on that? Isn’t it completely obvious?’”</p> <p>But he says there is one reason that stands out. “Generally, in life, we like to feel like we’re having some kind of impact. It could be at work, with our family, with our kids. It’s very broad. You can make an impact in lots of ways, but one of the ways is by being generous and giving.”</p>    <p>Norton’s research has looked at <a href="https://greatergood.berkeley.edu/images/uploads/DunnAkninNorton2008.pdf" rel="nofollow">the spending habits of more than 600 Americans</a>. What he and his colleagues found was that the amount of money didn’t matter – any act of giving improved their happiness, no matter how small. It’s a fact Norton says that should bring us comfort in a time when the cost of living can make having an impact more difficult.</p> <p>“It speaks to the idea that [giving] isn’t just for people who are already doing well,” he says. “People who are struggling still say: other people are struggling too, let me help them. It’s a wonderful mindset. When we push ourselves, that’s when we see people get more wellbeing out of it.”</p> <h2>Creating lasting joy for future generations</h2> <p>When you give to The Smith Family, Australian children, their families, schools and the wider communities get help to break the cycle of poverty. But the act of giving can also have a lasting effect on donors that spans generations. After decades of giving to The Smith Family, Marianne is now delighted to see her own daughters and grandchildren sponsoring children through the charity.</p> <p>“It’s part of teaching our young people in our own families to be good citizens,” she says. “The main thing that comes from helping is: someone values me. They don’t even know me, but we are sending an unspoken message. You are valuable. You are worthwhile.”</p> <p>Giving, Norton says, has the power to cut through life’s many other challenges. “On average, across people, we see that it results in more happiness than pointing the arrow at ourselves.” It is not the size of the gift that’s important, he says, but knowing it’s still possible to make a difference.</p> <p><em><strong><a href="https://www.thesmithfamily.com.au/sponsor-a-child?utm_medium=affiliate&amp;amp;utm_source=guardian&amp;amp;utm_campaign=2025_back-to-school_content-partnerships-premium-article&amp;amp;utm_term=think-piece&amp;amp;utm_content=link2&amp;amp;utm_creative_format=text&amp;amp;utm_marketing_tactic=brand-awareness" rel="nofollow">Feel the benefits of charitable investments yourself – sponsor a child today with The Smith Family.</a></strong></em></p>
