---
title: 'TV tonight: a French psychological thriller about a ‘perfect’ nanny '
slug: tv-tonight-a-french-psychological-thriller-about-a-perfect-nanny
category: Psychology
difficulty: Evening Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p>An au pair seems too good to be true in The Intruder. Plus: Amanda Holden’s
  impossible new gameshow – and movie week on Strictly! Here’s what to watch
  this evening</p>
word_count: 993
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C2
---
<h2><strong>The Intruder</strong></h2> <p><strong>9pm, BBC Four</strong></p> <p>A claustrophobic “don’t trust the perfect nanny!” psychological French thriller from the creators of Paris Police 1900. When wealthy mother of three Paula (Mélanie Doutey) returns to work, she and her husband hire Tess (Lucie Fagedet) to be a live-in au pair. But too-good-to-be-true Tess soon starts to unsettle Paula, who is left feeling – and looking – like she can’t handle being a working mother. <em>Hollie Richardson</em></p> <h2><strong>The Celebrity Inner Circle</strong></h2> <p><strong>5.20pm, BBC One</strong></p> <p>A gameshow in which celebrity-civilian pairings are put through convoluted rounds containing impossible-to-follow rules, while host Amanda Holden screams “You little shafters!” at them. This week, radio host Rick Edwards, actor Fay Ripley and Paralympian Hannah Cockroft pretend to know what’s going on. <em>Ellen E Jones</em></p> <h2><strong>Strictly Come Dancing</strong></h2> <p><strong>6.05pm, BBC One</strong></p> <p>It’s movie week and, rather excitingly, Wicked’s Cynthia Erivo is joining as the first celebrity mentor! Amber and Nikita will do the American smooth to The Sound of Music, Balvinder and Julian will foxtrot to Swing Time, La Voix and Aljaž are waltzing to Mary Poppins, while Ellie and Vito are going to samba to a song from Barbie. <em>HR</em></p> <h2><strong>Bettany Hughes’ Treasures of the World</strong></h2> <p><strong>7pm, Channel 4</strong></p> <p>Helmed by the ever-agreeable Hughes, this series is part history lesson, part laid-back travelogue. She is now in Croatia, admiring the beauty of Korčula (as seen in Succession) and its Neolithic relics. Then it’s on to Split, for a sleepover at Roman emperor Diocletian’s “seaside retirement home”. <em>Hannah J Davies</em></p> <h2><strong>Nine Bodies in a Mexican Morgue</strong></h2> <p><strong>9.25pm, BBC One</strong></p> <p>We’re four days in and three bodies down in Anthony Horowitz’s plane-crash thriller. It’s an episode dedicated to Carlos – AKA pro Mexican wrestler Rapido. But as we learn more about his past, we also see more cracks in the group – especially between the newlyweds. So who will be knocked off next? <em>HR</em></p> <h2><strong>Romesh Ranganathan’s Parents’ Evening</strong></h2> <p><strong>9.40pm, ITV1</strong></p> <p>The comedian’s quizshow teams celebrities with their parent or child and makes them guess how many questions they’ll get right. Pete Wicks turns up with his mum, but there’s a nepobabies vibe, as Krishnan Guru-Murthy and Gabby Logan talk about their kids going to school together. <em>Alexi Duggins</em></p> <h2><strong>Film choice</strong></h2> <p><strong>The Woman in Cabin 10, out now, Netflix</strong></p>    <p>We seem to be in the middle of a run of dramas about Guardian journalists, what with ITV’s The Hack and now this rather more fantastical Christie-esque mystery. Keira Knightley plays ace reporter Laura, who takes time out from writing about global conflict to join a luxury cruise with a terminally ill Norwegian shipping heiress/philanthropist, her husband and other filthy rich folk. But after a mysterious woman goes overboard one night and – in Lady Vanishes style – everyone denies she ever existed, Laura’s investigative instincts kick in … <em>Simon Wardell</em></p> <p><strong>Presence, 4.35pm, 10.10pm, Sky Cinema Premiere</strong></p> <p>Steven Soderbergh loves testing his abilities as a film-maker, and for his nifty 2024 supernatural story he decided that the entire thing should be shot from the point of view of the ghost. So, as a family including mother Rebekah (Lucy Liu) and troubled teenage daughter Chloe (Callina Liang) settle into their new suburban house, the camera – AKA the Presence – follows them around. Chloe seems aware of the poltergeist, and it seems protective of her. But why? It’s a fun idea that doesn’t outstay its welcome, with a twist you might not see coming. <em>SW</em></p> <p><strong>The Unbearable Weight of Massive Talent, 9pm, Channel 4</strong></p>    <p>You can’t help but admire Nicolas Cage’s commitment to his cult stardom. When he’s not going to extremes for his art, he’s taking the mickey out of himself for doing just that. In this meta comedy caper, he plays self-obsessed, on-the-slide Hollywood actor Nicolas Cage, who takes a $1m payday to appear at a birthday party in Mallorca for billionaire, and Cage uberfan, Javi Gutierrez (Pedro Pascal). Asked by the CIA to spy on suspected cartel boss Javi, Cage’s “nouveau shamanic acting ability” comes in handy – like Team America: World Police made flesh. <em>SW</em></p> <p><strong>The Black Phone, 10.50pm, Film4</strong></p> <p>A belated sequel is heading your way soon, but Scott Derrickson’s locked-room horror needs no follow-up. A series of child abductions in 1978 Denver has the kids on edge, and when Finney (Mason Thames) is taken by “the Grabber” (Ethan Hawke) and kept captive in a basement, he fears the worst. But the disconnected phone on the wall keeps ringing, with the spooky callers offering help, while the prescient dreams of his sister Gwen (Madeleine McGraw) could save him too. A solid creepfest. <em>SW</em></p> <h2><strong>Live sport</strong></h2> <p><strong>Women’s World Cup Cricket: England v Sri Lanka, 10am, Sky Sports Main Event</strong> From R Premadasa Stadium in Colombo. England v Pakistan is on Wed at 10am.</p> <p><strong>Prem Rugby Union: Northampton v Leicester, 2.30pm, TNT Sports 1 </strong>Followed by Bath v Gloucester at 5.15pm. On Friday, Gloucester play Bristol Bears at 7pm.</p> <p><strong>Super League Rugby: Hull Kingston Rovers v Wigan Warriors, 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event</strong> The grand final at Old Trafford.</p>
