---
title: Two Affinity Education executives resign after childcare scandals
slug: two-affinity-education-executives-resign-after-childcare-scandals
category: education
difficulty: Short Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p>CEO Tim Hickey and chief operating officer Nishad Alani both step down,
  with childcare group saying it is committed to safe care</p><ul><li><p><a
  href="https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2025/oct/14/australia-news-live-jim-chalmers-superannuation-concession-tax-cybercrime-anthony-albanese-sussan-ley-coalition-penny-wong-israel-gaza-ntwnfb">Follow
  our Australia news live blog for latest updates</a></p></li><li><p>Get our <a
  href="https://www.theguardian.com/email-newsletters?CMP=cvau_sfl">breaking
  news email</a>, <a href="https://app.adjust.com/w4u7jx3">free app</a> or <a
  href="https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/series/full-story?CMP=cvau_sfl">daily
  news podcast</a></p></li></ul>
word_count: 586
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C2
---
<p>Two executives at the scandal-plagued childcare chain Affinity Education Group have resigned.</p> <p>The moves come amid a difficult period for one of the nation’s largest childcare chains after multiple child sexual offences were laid against a former employee, Joshua Brown, in July.</p> <p>In a statement, Affinity Education Group said its chief executive, Tim Hickey, and its chief operating officer, Nishad Alani, had stepped down from their roles and left the organisation.</p> <p>A spokesperson said Affinity Education Group’s board had appointed Glen Hurley, its senior adviser for compliance and quality, as the incoming CEO. He began the role on Tuesday.</p> <p><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/email-newsletters?CMP=copyembed&amp;CMP=emailbutton"><sub>Sign up: AU Breaking News email</sub></a></p> <p>The reason for the two high-profile departures was not provided by the childcare group.</p> <p>“Affinity remains deeply committed to providing safe, high-quality care to the families across our entire network and supporting our dedicated, professional team who nurture and educate the children in their care with compassion and integrity,” a spokesperson said.</p> <p>The spokesperson said Hurley, who had previously worked in the aged care sector in a variety of senior executive roles, brought “deep experience” and “operational insight” to the role.</p> <p>Affinity runs 250 childcare centres in Australia, including centres under the brand name Papilio Early Learning.</p> <p>In July, Victoria police charged Brown, who worked at childcare centres run by Affinity, with more than 70 offences relating to eight alleged victims, aged between five months and two years old.</p> <p>Brown worked at 11 Affinity childcare centres in Victoria during 2024, according to a list on its website.</p> <p>Guardian Australia previously reported on bosses at Australia’s largest for-profit childcare providers receiving bonuses worth up to $500,000 last year, despite multiple safety breaches and the employment of a man subsequently charged with multiple child sexual offences.</p> <p>The salaries sparked calls for boards to consider clawing back some of money, given outrage over safety failures and recent apologies from CEOs.</p> <p>Appearing before a New South Wales parliamentary inquiry into the childcare sector last month, Hickey said he was not sure whether his bonus payments of up to about $300,000 had been docked as a result of safety breaches.</p> <p>The inquiry was told that breaches at Affinity childcare centres were 70% higher than the NSW average in 2024, up from 30% in 2021 when the company was bought by Quadrant Private Equity.</p> <p>The inquiry heard allegations that one of these breaches included a child being used as a “human mop” to wipe up their own vomit on two occasions.</p> <p>Hickey told the inquiry his total pay package had increased over the past three years. His base salary was $625,000, the inquiry heard.</p> <p>Hickey said 90% of Affinity’s centres had either met or exceeded the national quality standard.</p> <p>“I can say without doubt that recent events are more troubling than any I’ve seen in that time – and I am absolutely committed to doing everything within my control to ensure this never happens again,” he said.</p>  <figure class="element element-embed" data-alt="Breaking News">  <iframe class="fenced" srcdoc="&lt;html&gt;&lt;head&gt;&lt;/head&gt;&lt;body&gt;&lt;script src=&quot;https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2025/01/21/article-button.js&quot;&gt;&lt;script&gt;&lt;/body&gt;&lt;/html&gt;"></iframe> </figure>
