---
title: UK economy grows by only 0.1% amid falling business investment
slug: uk-economy-grows-by-only-0-1-amid-falling-business-investment
category: business
difficulty: Evening Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p>GDP in last three months of 2025 also hit by weak consumer spending, with
  little momentum going into this year</p><ul><li><p><a
  href="https://www.theguardian.com/business/2026/feb/12/uk-economy-gdp-reasons-for-optimism-analysis">Analysis:
  UK economy limps along at 0.1% growth – but there are reasons for optimism in
  2026</a></p></li></ul>
word_count: 958
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C2
---
<p>The UK economy expanded by only 0.1% in the final three months of last year, according to official data, as falling business investment and weak consumer spending led to little momentum going into 2026.</p> <p>Figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) show that the economy grew at the same rate of 0.1% as the previous three months. This was less than a 0.2% rise that economists had been expecting.</p> <p>The economy grew by 1.3% in 2025, an improvement on growth of 1.1% in 2024, although worse than official forecasts of 1.5%. The ONS said the economy also expanded by 0.1% on a monthly basis in December, slowing from 0.2% in November – a figure that was <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2026/jan/15/uk-gdp-economy-growth-stagnation-november-rachel-reeves-pound-ftse-100-business-live-news-updates?filterKeyEvents=false&amp;page=with%3Ablock-6967c21b8f0876b1bcdd3298">revised down from 0.3%</a>.</p> <p>The downbeat data came as Rachel Reeves prepares to use a major speech in the coming weeks to insist she will stick to her growth plan, reviving the term “securonomics” to describe the approach.</p> <p>After a deliberately low-key House of Commons statement to mark the spring forecast on 3 March, the chancellor plans to deliver a public lecture, reiterating her strategy and setting out priorities for 2026.</p> <p>Treasury sources said these will include the opportunities the government sees in AI – with an aide calling her an “optimist” about the technology – and hopes for closer EU ties.</p> <p>It follows the revelation that health secretary Wes Streeting told then US ambassador Peter Mandelson that Labour had “no growth strategy at all”.</p> <p>The rise came despite there being no growth at all in the dominant services sector, which makes up about 80% of the economy. The small boost was instead driven by the production sector, up by 1.2%, while the construction industry shrank 2.1%, its worst performance in four years, the ONS said.</p>  <figure class="element element-interactive interactive" data-interactive="https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/iframe-wrapper/0.1/boot.js" data-canonical-url="https://interactive.guim.co.uk/datawrapper/embed/56TkP/1/" data-alt="Bar graph showing GDP per quarter since start of 2024"> <a href="https://interactive.guim.co.uk/datawrapper/embed/56TkP/1/">Interactive</a> </figure>  <p>Liz McKeown, the director of economic statistics at the ONS, said: “The economy continued to grow slowly in the last three months of the year, with the growth rate unchanged from the previous quarter.</p> <p>“The often-dominant services sector showed no growth, with the main driver instead coming from manufacturing. Construction, meanwhile, registered its worst performance in more than four years.”</p> <p>Business investment fell by 2.7% in the final quarter, while consumer spending grew by a sluggish 0.2%.</p> <p>The figures back up earlier consumer and business surveys that suggested economic activity had slowed in the run-up to the late November budget, as households held off spending and companies delayed investment decisions amid speculation that the chancellor would implement significant tax rises.</p> <p>“The big picture is that private sector activity still appears to be extremely subdued,” said Ruth Gregory, the deputy chief UK economist at Capital Economics.</p> <p>The UK economy fared relatively well in the first half of 2025, with growth of 0.7% in the first quarter and 0.3% in the second quarter. </p> <p>However, economic output was then hit by the <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/business/2025/nov/14/jaguar-land-rover-loss-cyber-attack">cyber-attack on Britain’s biggest carmaker, Jaguar Land Rover</a>, which depressed vehicle production and led to the minimal growth in the third quarter. Speculation around the autumn budget appears to have further hindered growth in the final three months.</p> <p>“These figures confirm that the UK economy ended 2025 with a whimper,” said Suren Thiru, the economics director at the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales. “Businesses had a particularly bleak quarter as the dark cloud of uncertainty caused by the budget and higher costs severely curtailed trade and investment plans.”</p> <p>However, more recent surveys for January have suggested that business and consumer sentiment picked up in the new year, with economists expecting growth of 0.4% in the first quarter of 2026.</p> <p>Fergus Jimenez-England, an associate economist at the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, said the government must avoid spooking businesses any further.</p> <p>“With the spring statement upcoming in March, the chancellor should look to support this change in sentiment by avoiding a repeat of last year and refrain from further policy changes,” he said.</p> <p>The Office for Budget Responsibility had <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2025/nov/26/obr-rachel-reeves-budget-public-finances-vulnerable-growth-forecast">forecast GDP growth</a> to be 1.5% in 2025 and 1.4% in 2026. The government’s official forecaster expects the economy to grow at annual pace of 1.5% up to 2030, partly because of low productivity growth.</p> <p>Bank of England policymakers <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/business/2026/feb/05/bank-of-england-interest-rates-held-inflation-concerns">left interest rates unchanged at 3.75% last week</a> but indicated that lower inflation as a result of cost of living measures in Reeves’s budget should pave the way for cuts in the months ahead.</p> <p>Reeves, who on Wednesday insisted Labour could win the political argument for a <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2026/feb/11/labour-political-argument-closer-eu-ties-rachel-reeves">closer relationship with the EU</a>, said: “The government has the right economic plan to build a stronger and more secure economy, cutting the cost of living, cutting the national debt and creating the conditions for growth and investment in every part of the country.”</p>
