---
title: Underwear optional? The health pros and cons of going commando
slug: underwear-optional-the-health-pros-and-cons-of-going-commando
category: Health
difficulty: Evening Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p>There are times when it is better to wear underwear than not. Here’s what
  the experts say</p>
word_count: 1026
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C2
---
<p>In 2015, during a particularly energetic performance of the song American Woman in Stockholm, Lenny Kravitz <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/aug/05/lenny-kravitz-how-easy-is-it-to-rip-leather-trousers">split a pair of leather pants</a> right down the crotch, revealing his manhood to the world.</p> <p>I’m sorry to say I think about this incident somewhat regularly. Not out of titillation, but because it planted in my head a troublesome question: just how many people, rock stars or otherwise, aren’t wearing underwear in public?</p> <p>Perhaps unsurprisingly, there is not a lot of data to answer this question. One <a href="https://963kklz.com/2023/09/19/how-many-americans-are-regularly-going-commando/">2023 YouGov poll</a> found that 7% of Americans say they always go commando, and another 10% say they “often” forgo underwear.</p> <aside class="element element-rich-link element--thumbnail"> <p> <span>Related: </span><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2026/feb/10/healthy-relationship-advice-tips">People in the US: what is your top piece of relationship advice?</a> </p> </aside>  <p>Nor has there been much research on how healthy it is. “There is limited research directly comparing health outcomes between wearing and not wearing underwear,” says Dr Kyle Benda, a board-certified family physician at Whitman-Walker health, a non-profit community health center in Washington DC. “The primary consideration should really be the comfort of the individual.”</p> <p>But there are times when experts suggest it is better to wear underwear than not. And the cut and fabric of your undergarments matter, too. Below, the pros and cons of going commando.</p> <h2><strong>But first, how does underwear affect one’s health?</strong></h2> <p>If one is wearing the appropriate underwear, it shouldn’t affect your health much, Benda says. But what the appropriate underwear is might vary slightly from person to person.</p>  <figure class="element element-interactive interactive" data-interactive="https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/iframe-wrapper/0.1/boot.js" data-canonical-url="https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2023/10/archive-zip/giv-13425WMrLo2pc9VIk/" data-alt="Graphic with three lines of text that say, in bold, ‘Well Actually’, then ‘Read more on living a good life in a complex world,’ then a pinkish-lavender pill-shaped button with white letters that say ‘More from this section’"> <a href="https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2023/10/archive-zip/giv-13425WMrLo2pc9VIk/">Interactive</a> </figure>  <p>For men, boxers, boxer-briefs and briefs are all good options for regular wear, says Dr Justin Dubin, urologist and director of men’s sexual health at Baptist Health South Florida, and co-host of the Man Up podcast.</p> <p>One 2018 study did find the type of underwear men wore affected their sperm count; men who wore boxers had a 25% higher concentration of sperm and 17% higher sperm count compared with those who wore tighter undies. This could be because tight underwear keeps testicles closer to the body, potentially increasing the temperature of testicles, “making for a less favorable environment for sperm to develop”, Dubin says.</p> <aside class="element element-rich-link element--thumbnail"> <p> <span>Related: </span><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/wellness/2026/feb/03/black-sesame-health-benefits">Black sesame is growing more popular in the US. Is it actually good for you?</a> </p> </aside>  <p>But don’t toss out all your briefs just yet. Dubin says these are not significant concerns for average men with healthy sperm production. “Fertility is not likely going to be compromised by what underwear you wear,” he says. “But if you want to do everything you can to have the best swimmers, wear boxers or boxer-briefs.”</p> <p>For women, an undergarment’s fabric can affect health. “It’s ideal to wear cotton underwear since it’s breathable,” says Dr Natasha Bhuyan, family physician in Phoenix, Arizona. Fabrics like polyester, on the other hand, can trap heat and moisture. This “increases the risk of things like yeast infection or tinea cruris (jock itch)”, she explains.</p> <p>Fit also matters, Bhuyan adds. “Underwear that is too tight can cause ingrown hairs or irritation from the friction,” she says.</p> <h2><strong>Is it </strong><strong>healthier to not wear underwear then?</strong></h2> <p>It’s mostly a personal preference, experts say.</p> <p>For healthy individuals, going commando is generally safe and may even “reduce exposure to potential irritants found in underwear and detergents”, Benda says.</p> <p>Depending on what clothes you’re wearing, skipping pants can also provide better airflow to your genitals, preventing moisture from getting trapped in the area, Bhuyan says. She says it’s also a good idea to skip underwear immediately after a swim or a bath. “You want to ensure you are dry first,” she says.</p> <aside class="element element-rich-link element--thumbnail"> <p> <span>Related: </span><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/wellness/2026/jan/20/parasite-cleanse-worms">Does it even need to be said? No, you don’t need to do a ‘parasite cleanse’</a> </p> </aside>  <p>As for when you absolutely should put on underwear, experts advise wearing it when you exercise to reduce friction and to provide support. Dubin further suggests that men wear tighter underwear and a cup during contact sports like soccer, baseball or hockey, in order to reduce the risk of injury.</p> <p>Specific underwear might also be helpful in certain medical situations. If, say, a person has undergone scrotal surgery, like a vasectomy, “we often recommend briefs, jock straps or tight athletic boxer-briefs as they provide more support and comfort after surgery”, Dubin says.</p> <p>Bhuyan adds that if a person is postpartum from a vaginal delivery, “they will usually end up wearing stretchy mesh underwear with pads”.</p> <p>Finally, there are also “certain social situations where wearing underwear might be deemed more appropriate”, Dubin says.</p> <p>Do these include musical performances in Stockholm? Not according to Mr Kravitz.</p> <p>• This article was amended on 11 February 2026. An earlier version misspelled Dr Kyle Benda’s surname.</p>
