---
title: Why aren’t we investing more in nature?
slug: why-aren-t-we-investing-more-in-nature
category: nature
difficulty: Evening Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: <p>Spending on nature could be an answer to Australia’s productivity woes</p>
word_count: 1003
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C2
---
<p>Productivity is a hot topic. But there’s one potential way of boosting it that you might not have heard much about: investing in nature. </p> <p>Research conducted by the sustainability advisory firm Cyan Ventures has found that increasing government spending on nature to 1% of the federal budget – which would cost about an additional $6bn a year – would increase Australia’s productivity growth by more than 40% (adding 0.39 percentage points to the 0.9% average productivity growth Australia recorded over the two decades to 2022-23). This extra spending is unlikely to contribute to inflation or put the budget into deficit, researchers found.</p> <p>The research was commissioned by <a href="https://30by30.org.au/" rel="nofollow">30 by 30</a>, an alliance of conservation, land management and science groups calling for action to ensure Australia meets its commitment to protect 30% of land and sea by 2030. It is published in the report Nature Economics, which makes a case for increasing government spending by quantifying the value of nature in economic terms, says Dr Fraser Thompson, an economist and managing partner at Cyan Ventures. </p> <p>Nature’s value to the Australian economy is about $511bn a year, the report says. This comprises $58bn in environmental and nature-based taxes, $138bn from nature-dependent industry sectors such as food production and tourism, and about $315bn from non-market ecosystem services such as climate regulation, water purification, pollination and flood protection. </p>    <ul> <li><p>Photo supplied.</p></li> </ul> <p>Thompson says the final tally surprised him. “If you look at the full economic contribution of nature, it is basically equivalent to the combined contribution of the financing and mining sectors in Australia,” he says. “For me, that finding was even bigger than I thought it would be, particularly given we were being quite conservative in our methodologies.”</p> <h2>The link between nature spending and productivity</h2> <p>The report argues that investing more in nature would boost productivity in four ways. The first is through capital deepening, or investing in supporting infrastructure to enhance output by increasing the amount of productive capital per worker.</p> <p>Thompson points to analysis done by the consulting firm McKinsey this year that attributed about 70% of Australia’s recent productivity slowdown to declining investment. “We’re just not putting enough capital into supporting infrastructure to make workers as productive as possible,” he says.</p> <p>Capital deepening accounts for almost half the productivity impact of nature investment that the 30 by 30 report forecasts, or almost a 20% uplift in productivity growth. It’s not only about man-made infrastructure, Thompson says. It’s also about adding natural assets. “For example, wetlands can play the same role as traditional stormwater infrastructure and they have lower lifecycle costs and reduce flood risks, as well as all their social benefits.” </p>    <ul> <li><p>Bunya Mountains National Park. Photo supplied.</p></li> </ul> <p>The second way nature spending can increase productivity is through capital productivity, or getting more output per unit of existing capital. Poor soil quality – including soil acidity, salinity and erosion – costs Australian farmers about $4bn a year, the report says. “Nature-based investments can improve soil health and thereby improve agricultural productivity,” Thompson says.</p> <p>Increased investment in nature would also be a considerable boost to human productivity, as urban greening and access to nature reduces heat stress and improves mental health, the report says. Lastly, avoided losses are investments that reduce the probability of future economic losses from storms, floods and erosion, so capital and labour stay productive long-term. Natural disasters are projected to cost Australia about $73bn by 2060, the report says, and Thompson says investing in conserving and restoring mangrove belts and other ecosystems can help mitigate these future costs. </p> <p>If you put these four levers together, you get a 40% increase in annual labour productivity growth, he says. “That’s equivalent to some of the potential impacts that the Productivity Commission has said could come from major tax reforms.” </p> <h2>Australia is underinsured for ecosystem collapse </h2> <p>The research also found that compared with premiums for crop, natural hazard and flood insurance, Australia is investing very little relative to the risk related to ecosystem collapse. </p> <p>“When you look at it through that lens, we are only spending about 0.7 to 1.1% on nature [relative to the total value at risk],” Thompson says. “In effect, we would need to increase that spending five and a half times to get more in line with those other benchmarks.”</p> <h2>Footing the bill</h2>    <ul> <li><p>Roper River, Northern Territory. Photo supplied.</p></li> </ul> <p>A substantial uplift in government spending on nature is possible without requiring new taxes or putting the budget into deficit, Thompson says. Australia could cover more than half the required $6bn a year by redirecting disaster recovery funding to nature-based solutions, and capping the fuel tax credit rebate, the research found. </p> <p>The remainder might be covered by initiatives such as targeted environmental taxes, charging higher fees for international visitors to biodiversity sites, reforms to carbon markets, and further changes to fossil fuel subsidies, the report says.</p> <p>The $6bn is, Thompson says, “a big number and we’re not expecting that you’d close that overnight, but we think there’s a pathway to close it”. </p> <p>A phased approach makes it possible but it’s critical to start now, Thompson says. </p> <p>“Nature is an integral part of our economy, and an important part of our budget, as well as being essential for socioeconomic aspects like mental health. When you put all that together, we think regardless of where you sit, there is a really compelling case for why we should be investing more in nature.”</p> <p><em><strong><a href="https://30by30.org.au/act-now-fair-go-for-nature/?utm_source=guardian&amp;utm_campaign=natureeconomics" rel="nofollow">Find out more at 30by30.org.au.</a></strong></em></p>
