---
title: 'WSL talking points: Chelsea’s historic run ended to give City breathing space'
slug: wsl-talking-points-chelsea-s-historic-run-ended-to-give-city-breathing-space
category: space
difficulty: Evening Read
source: The Guardian
license: Non-commercial use only
summary: >-
  <p>Manchester City show their resilience, Spurs eye the Champions League and
  Liverpool look to splash the cash</p>
word_count: 1189
translation: ''
date: ''
cefr: C2
---
<h2>Manchester City show the right mentality</h2> <p>How much has Manchester City’s mentality evolved and strengthened? After they overcame a stubborn Leicester City side <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/dec/07/reborn-and-ruthless-can-manchester-city-realise-their-wsl-title-dream-leicester-city">3-0 on Sunday</a> to claim a ninth straight win, it would appear the answer to that question is “significantly” compared to recent seasons, as they demonstrated a unity and a composure that has perhaps evaded many title hopefuls of old. December last year brought moments when Manchester City’s campaign began to unravel, through a combination of injuries and surprise defeats. On Sunday they looked like potential champions in the sense that they found a way to win what could very easily have become a frustrating game, against a back five in a low block. Andrée Jeglertz pointed to this professionalism and calmness at full time: “I’m very proud and pleased with the patience the players are showing, the trust, the belief. They are not starting to yell at each other, they just keep believing in each other and believing in what we are doing.” <strong>Tom Garry</strong></p> <aside class="element element-rich-link element--thumbnail"> <p> <span>Related: </span><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/dec/07/reborn-and-ruthless-can-manchester-city-realise-their-wsl-title-dream-leicester-city">Reborn and ruthless: can Manchester City realise their WSL title dream?</a> </p> </aside>  <h2>Chelsea’s historic unbeaten run ended</h2> <p>It had to happen at some point, didn’t it? But few would have anticipated that Everton would be the team to end Chelsea’s historic 34-game unbeaten WSL run. The reigning champions had not lost a league fixture in 585 days, dating back to May 2024 when they suffered a defeat to Liverpool. Despite having 79% of the possession against Everton and 30 shots on goal, Chelsea could not make the most of their chances and ultimately paid the price, leaving them six points behind league leaders Manchester City. Sonia Bompastor, for whom this was a first taste of defeat in the WSL, said: “It’s a really frustrating result. It’s tough, but I think if we analyse the performance and look at the statistics, I don’t think the players could have done a lot more. Maybe we could have been more clinical. We created enough shots, crosses, and we hit the woodwork three times. It’s just one of these games where the ball didn’t want to go in.” <strong>Emillia Hawkins</strong></p> <h2>Spurs eye Champions League spot under Ho</h2> <p>Martin Ho’s shake-up of Tottenham is starting to show results. A frantic final 10 minutes against Aston Villa was blockbuster viewing as Bethany England and Olivia Holdt scored to seal a stunning 2-1 comeback. Already they are just one point short of their total points haul (20) last season. They’re also a point away from a Champions League spot. The Spurs squad has not changed hugely, with a handful of players exiting in the summer and two signings. But what seems to have changed is their mentality. Jessica Naz being carried off with an injury in the second half felt like a make-or-break situation – they chose to make the best of it. “It’s just a never-say-never attitude,” said England, “It was important to make sure we weren’t sulking or accepting a defeat to a team we know we can beat.” <strong>Renuka Odedra</strong></p>    <h2>Familiar failings for West Ham before six-pointer</h2> <p>On the face of it maybe West Ham shouldn’t be too disappointed with the 2-1 defeat at Manchester United on Sunday. After all United had won each of their five home games against the Hammers in the WSL by an aggregate score of 17-0. As it happened it was a familiar theme that undid the visitors with Dominique Janssen’s fantastic free-kick securing the three points for Marc Skinner’s side. West Ham have struggled with set-pieces this season and have now conceded from seven of them in their 10 league games – the most in the top flight. The West Ham manager, Rehanne Skinner, was not too downbeat after the defeat. “The way we showed ourselves today shows the improvements we have made,” she told the BBC. “The fact that we are so disappointed not to have come away with anything shows the attitude and belief among the players.” Next, though, comes a game against Liverpool, the only side behind the Hammers in the WSL table. <strong>Réshma Rao</strong></p> <h2>Give Gareth Taylor what he needs</h2> <p>With Liverpool sitting bottom of the WSL table, you would be forgiven for being concerned about their top-flight status. Yet, despite two draws and no wins from nine games, the performances of Gareth Taylor’s side, particularly in <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/football/2025/dec/06/arsenal-liverpool-wsl-match-report">Saturday’s 2-1 loss to Arsenal</a> and their back-to-back points earned against Brighton and Chelsea in the two preceding fixtures, have been promising. They need signings, though and “lots” of them, according to Taylor. The manager conceded coming into a club with so little resources, after working at Manchester City, was “really tough”. “I like a challenge. This is a real challenge,” he said. “The girls are top class, they really are. They’re really humble. They want to be coached. You can see that they want to get better and improve. We want this thing to work. I am a coach that never usually compromises on my game style or method or philosophy but of course I need players that can execute that as well. So, at the moment, I am making compromises. I’ve been honest and open about that and I’d be daft not to be.” Now, the board needs to cough up. <strong>Suzanne Wrack</strong></p> <h2>Nnadozie proves one of the signings of the season</h2> <p>Chiamaka Nnadozie is looking like one of the signings of the season and impressed once more in Brighton’s narrow 1-0 win over London City Lionesses. Before Sunday’s game, the Nigerian goalkeeper had made the joint highest number of stops in the league (42) alongside Leicester City’s Janina Leitzig and had a save percentage (80.8%) that is second only to Hannah Hampton’s. The 25-year-old does live by the “no risk, no reward” mantra but, despite the odd scare, her shot-stopping is second to none. She made five saves to deny the hosts at Bromley, proving a crucial cog in a Brighton defence that came under pressure but never broke. The visitors were also helped by London City’s wastefulness in front of goal. The Seagulls’ out-of-possession work is the part of their game that has developed the most in 2025 and they boast the fourth-joint meanest defence in the league. The consistency of the centre-back partnership between Caitlin Hayes and Moeka Minami has been key to this. <strong>Sophie Downey</strong></p>
