# 2023 年 06 月大学英语四级考试真题（第 1 套）

## Part I / Writing / (30 minutes)

**Directions:** _For this part, you are allowed 30 minutes to write an essay that begins with the sentence "**When faced with differing opinions,we should try to reach agreement through friendly discussion and reasonable argument.**" You can make comments, cite examples, or use your personal experiences to develop your essay. You should write at least <u>150</u> words but no more than <u>200</u> words (<u>not including the sentence given</u>)._

## Part II / Listening Comprehension / (25 minutes)

### Section A

**Directions:** _In this section, you will hear two long conversations. At the end of each conversation, you will hear four questions. Both the conversation and the questions will be spoken only once. After you hear a question, you must choose the best answer from the four choices marked A), B), C), and D). Then mark the corresponding letter on **Answer Sheet 1** with a single line through the centre._

**Questions 1 to 4 are based on the conversation you have just heard.**

1. A) She is attracted to the beauty of modern buildings.  
   B) She is preoccupied with her dream to be an architect.  
   C) She is influenced by her father who teaches architecture.  
   D) She is drawn to its integration of design and engineering.

2. A) Through hard work.  
   B) With the professor's help.  
   C) By studying the subject online.  
   D) By taking prerequisite courses.

3. A) It is groundbreaking.  
   B) It is long-lasting  
   C) It is immaterial.  
   D) It is immortal.

4. A) Economics  
   B) Philosophy  
   C) Computer science.  
   D) Western art.

**Questions 5 to 8 are based on the conversation you have just heard.**

5. A) He has occasionally been harassed by his fans.  
   B) He has been guarded by a discreet assistant.  
   C) He is well known to the public.  
   D) He is a famous football coach.

6. A) Serve as a personal assistant.  
   B) Play a key role in Real Madrid.  
   C) Run common daily chores for the woman.  
   D) Help promote Mr.Sanchez's public profile.

7. A) He is honest and always tells the truth.  
   B) He once worked part-time in university.  
   C) He cares little about his working hours.  
   D) He has little previous work experience.

8. A) He has a strong ability to connect with people.  
   B) He has a high proficiency in several languages.  
   C) He has a sound knowledge of sports consultancy.  
   D) He has a natural capacity to cooperate with others.

### Section B

**Directions:** _In this section, you will hear two passages. At the end of each passage, you will hear three or four questions. Both the passage and the questions will be spoken only once. After you hear a question, you must choose the best answer from the four choices marked A), B), C), and D). Then mark the corresponding letter on **Answer Sheet 1** with a single line through the centre._

**Questions 9 to 11 are based on the passage you have just heard.**

9. A) They bring more benefits to young people.  
   B) They require less supervision and training.  
   C) They are more suitable to young people.  
   D) They have fewer rules and pressures.

10. A) They prevent kids from enjoying adventure sports.  
    B) They help kids guard against any possible injuries.  
    C) They rob kids of the chance to cultivate their courage.  
    D) They deprive kids of the opportunity to develop team spirit.

11. A) Help them take up these sports when they are more mature.  
    B) Let them participate in some less risky outdoor activities.  
    C) Ask them to try some forms of indoor sports.  
    D) Introduce them to these sports step by step.

**Questions 12 to 15 are based on the passage you have just heard.**

12. A) Consumers often have a craving for the latest model.  
    B) Such products tend to comprise parts that are irreplaceable.  
    C) Tech firms intentionally design products to have short lifespans.  
    D) Manufacturers use effective strategies to promote fancier products.

13. A) Indicate the competitiveness of their products.  
    B) List a repairability score of their products.  
    C) Specify the major parts of their products.  
    D) Detail the life cycle of their products.

14. A) Take the initiative to reduce electronic waste.  
    B) Take due caution in upgrading their products.  
    C) Invest in constructing more recycling facilities.  
    D) Substitute all toxic substances with non-toxic ones.

15. A) It can be solved.  
    B) It is certain to worsen.  
    C) It will be fixed by tech companies.  
    D) It is unavoidable in the long run.

### Section C

**Directions:** _In this section, you will hear three recordings of lectures or talks followed by three or four questions. The recordings will be played only once. After you hear a question, you must choose the best answer from the four choices marked A), B), C), and D). Then mark the corresponding letter on **Answer Sheet 1** with a single line through the centre._

**Questions 16 to 18 are based on the recording you have just heard.**

16. A) How internet monitoring can be implemented.  
    B) How to encourage productive internet surfing.  
    C) How cyberloafing affects overall productivity.
    D) How to prevent employees from cyberloafing.

17. A) Cyberloafing is a sign of workers'laziness.  
    B) Cyberloafing may relieve employees of stress.  
    C) Employee engagement is closely related to job satisfaction.
    D) Overuse of social media may lead to decline in productivity.

18. A) Taking mini-breaks means better job performance.  
    B) Cyberloafing generally does more harm than good.  
    C) Worker turnover is linked to the time allowed for cyberloafing.
    D) Employees who indulge in internet surfing are most likely to quit.

**Questions 19 to 21 are based on the recording you have just heard.**

19. A) There were no wooden buildings.  
    B) There were environmental problems.  
    C) There were no trees.
    D) There were few settlers.

20. A) He served as chairman of the Nebraska State Board of Agriculture.  
    B) He urged the state to start the Nebraska State Gardening Society.  
    C) He engaged himself in a large number of aesthetic projects.
    D) He founded a newspaper and used it to promote his ideas.

21. A) A special prize was awarded to Julius Morton.  
    B) One million trees were planted throughout Nebraska.  
    C) The state government declared it the official Arbor Day.
    D) Nebraska earned the nickname"the Tree Planters State".

**Questions 22 to 25 are based on the recording you have just heard.**

22. A) They spread across Europe and Asia in a few decades.  
    B) They lived mostly in Africa for about 200,000 years.  
    C) They preferred to live in Europe rather than in Asia.
    D) They moved out of Africa about 60,000 years ago.

23. A) The discovery of two modern human teeth in China.  
    B) The traces of human migration out of Africa to Asia.  
    C) The human fossils discovered most recently in Africa.
    D) The Luna cave in Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region.

24. A) There must have been some reason for human migration.  
    B) There have been changes in animals'living conditions.  
    C) Humans adapted themselves to the environment there.
    D) Humans had access to abundant food sources there.

25. A) How humans settled down on the Arabian Peninsula.  
    B) When modern humans started to disperse out of Africa.  
    C) What path modern humans took to migrate out of Africa.
    D) Why fresh water is so important for human survival.

## Part III / Reading Comprehension / (40 minutes)

### Section A

**Directions:** _In this section, there is a passage with ten blanks. You are required to select one word for each blank from a list of choices given in a word bank following the passage. Read the passage through carefully before making your choices. Each choice in the bank is identified by a letter: Please mark the corresponding letter for each item on **Answer Sheet 2** with a single line through the centre. You may not use any of the words in the bank more than once._

Imagine sitting down to a big dinner: a massive steak, a large portion of fried potatoes, and cake for dessert. After eating so much, you should be too full to eat another bite. But some people experience a powerful urge to keep eating, even after <u>&emsp;26&emsp;</u> in a huge meal, a behavior that makes little sense, as most adults are well-versed in the dangers of obesity, which researchers have shown correlates with <u>&emsp;27&emsp;</u> health issues and is even linked to increased <u>&emsp;28&emsp;</u> risk. But some people still keep eating long after they should stop, a phenomenon Dr. Susan Thompson calls“_insatiable_ (永不满足的)hunger.” It is characterized by two main <u>&emsp;29&emsp;</u>: not being satisfied by eating, and having a desire to stay _sedentary_ (久坐不动的).

This is at <u>&emsp;30&emsp;</u> with how humans are biologically programmed. When there was a great deal of food available, ancient people would gorge on calories;this massive calorie intake was accompanied by an urge to get active. Humans were also programmed for something called“compensation,” which is the brain's <u>&emsp;31&emsp;</u> mechanism for preventing the accumulation of excess weight. With compensation, if you eat one large meal in the morning, you are naturally <u>&emsp;32&emsp;</u> to eat less for the rest of the day.

But recent studies show that 70% of American adults have lost the ability to naturally compensate for the calories they consume; worse <u>&emsp;33&emsp;</u>, a significant number of them report <u>&emsp;34&emsp;</u> hunger halfway through an eating session, but by the end of the meal, they feel the same or higher levels of hunger than when they sat down. Dr. Thompson argues that the main cause of this phenomenon is the modern diet, which is <u>&emsp;35&emsp;</u> of food high in sugar, carbohydrates and calories.

|                 |                |
| --------------- | -------------- |
| A) attributes   | I) innumerable |
| B) comprised    | J) mortality   |
| C) conceded     | K) odds        |
| D) conservation | L) plights     |
| E) diminishing  | M) regulatory  |
| F) far          | N) still       |
| G) inclined     | O) unmatchable |
| H) indulging    |                |

### Section B

**Directions**: _In this section, you are going to read a passage with ten statements attached to it. Each statement contains information given in one of the paragraphs. Identify the paragraph from which the information is derived. You may choose a paragraph more than once. Each paragraph is marked with a letter. Answer the questions by marking the corresponding letter on **Answer Sheet 2**._

**The problem with being perfect**

A) When psychologist Jessica Pryor lived near an internationally renowned university, she once saw a student walking into a library holding a sleeping bag and a coffee maker. She has heard of graduate students spending 12 to 18 hours at a time in the lab. Their schedules are meant to be literally punishing: If they are scientists-in-training, they won't allow themselves to watch Netflix until their experiments start generating results. “Relationships become _estranged_ (疏远的) — people stop inviting them to social gatherings or dinner parties, which leads them to spend even more time in the lab,” Pryor told me.

B) Along with other therapists, Pryor, who is now with the Family Institute at Northwestern University, is trying to sound the alarm about a tendency among young adults and college students to strive for perfection in their work — sometimes at any cost. Though it is often portrayed as a positive trait, Pryor and others say extreme perfectionism can lead to depression, anxiety, and even suicide.

C) What's more, perfectionism seems to be on the rise. In a study of thousands of American, Canadian, and British college students published earlier this year, Thomas Curran of the University of Bath and Andrew Hill of York St. John University found that today's college students report higher levels of perfectionism than college students did during the 1990s or early 2000s. They measured three types of perfectionism; self-oriented, or a desire to be perfect; socially prescribed, or a desire to live up to others'expectations; and other-oriented, or holding others to unrealistic standards. From 1989 to 2016, they found, self-oriented perfectionism scores increased by 10 percent, socially prescribed scores rose by 33 percent, and other-oriented perfectionism increased by 16 percent.

D) A person living with an other-oriented perfectionist might feel criticized by the perfectionist spouse for not doing houschold chores exactly the “right” way. “One of the most common things couples argue about is the proper way of loading the dishwasher,” says Amy Bach, a psychologist in Providence, Rhode Island.

E) Curran describes socially prescribed perfectionism as “My self-esteem is contingent on what other people think.” His study didn't examine the causal reasons for its rise, but he assumes that the rise of both standardized testing and social media might play a role. These days, Linkedln alerts us when our rival gets a new job, and Instagram can let us know how well "liked" our lives are compared with a friend's. In an opinion picce earlier this year, Curran and Hill argue that society has also become more dog-eat-dog. “Over the last 50 years, public interest and civic responsibility have been progressively eroded,” they write," replaced by a focus on self-interest and competition in a supposedly free and open marketplace.” We strive for perfection, it seems, because we feel we must in order to get ahead. Michael Brustein, a clinical psychologist in Manhattan, says when he first began practicing in 2007, he was surprised by how prevalent perfectionism was among his clients, despite how little his graduate training had focused on the phenomenon. He sees perfectionism in, among others, clients who are entrepreneurs, artists, and tech employees. "You're in New York because you're ambitious, you have this need to strive," he says. “But then your whole identity gets wrapped into a goal.”

F) Perfectionism can, of course, be a positive force. Think of professional athletes, who train aggressively for ever-higher levels of competition. In well-adjusted perfectionism, someone who doesn't get the gold is able to forget the setback and move on. In _maladaptive_ (不当的) perfectionism, meanwhile, people make an archive of all their failures. They revisit these archives constantly, thinking, as Pryor puts it," I need to make myself feel terrible so I don't do this again. "Then they double down," raising the expectation bar even higher, which increases the likelihood of defeat, which makes you self-critical, so you raise the bar higher, work even harder," she says. Next comes failure, shame, and pushing yourself even harder toward even higher and more impossible goals.

Meeting them becomes an “all or nothing” premise. Pryor offered this example: "Even if I'm an incredible attorney, if I don't make partner in the same pacing as one of my colleagues, clearly that means I'm a failure.”

G) Brustein says his perfectionist clients tend to devalue their accomplishments, so that every time a goal is achieved, the high lasts only a short time, like “a gas tank with a hole in it.” If the boss says you did a great job, it's because he doesn't know anything. If the audience likes your work, that's because it's too stupid to know what good art actually is. But, therapists say, there are also different ways perfectionism manifests. Some perfectionists are always pushing themselves forward. But others actually fall behind on work, unable to complete assignments unless they are, well, perfect. Or they might handicap their performance ahead of time. They're the ones partying until 2 a.m. the night before the final, so that when the grade C rolls in, there's a ready excuse.

H) While educators and parents have successfully convinced students of the need to be high performing and diligent, the experts told me, they haven't adequately prepared them for the inevitability of failure. Instead of praises like "You're so smart," parents and educators should say things like "You really stuck with it," Pryor says, to emphasize the value of perseverance over intrinsic talent. Pryor notes that many of her clients are wary she'll "turn them into some degenerate couch potato and teach them to be okay with it. "Instead, she tries to help them think through the parts of their perfectionism they'd like to keep, and to lose the parts that are ruining their lives.

I) Bach, who sees many students from Brown University, says some of them don't even go out on weekends, let alone weekdays. She tells them, “Aim high, but get comfortable with good enough.” When they don't get some award, she encourages them to remember that “one outcome is not a basis for a broad conclusion about the person's intelligence, qualifications, or potential for the future.”

J) The treatment for perfectionism might be as simple as having patients keep logs of things they can be proud of, or having them behave imperfectly in small ways, just to see how it feels. "We might have them hang the towels _crooked_ (不正的) or wear some clothing inside out,” says Martin Antony, a professor in the department of psychology at Ryerson University in Toronto.

K) Brustein likes to get his perfectionist clients to create values that are important to them, then try to shift their focus to living according to those values rather than achieving specific goals. It's a play on the “You really stuck with it” message for kids. In other words, it isn't about doing a headstand in yoga class; it's about going to yoga class in the first place, because you like to be the kind of person who takes care of herself. But he warns that some people go into therapy expecting too much-an instant transformation of themselves from a _pathological_ (病态的) perfectionist to a (still high- achieving) non-perfectionist. They try to be perfect, in other words, at no longer being perfect.

36. Socially prescribed perfectionism is described as one's self-esteem depending on other people's opinion.
37. Jessica Pryor has learned that some graduate students work such long hours in the lab that they have little time for entertainment or socializing.
38. The author believes perfectionism may sometimes be constructive.
39. It is found that perfectionism is getting more and more prevalent among college students.
40. Some experts suggest parents and educators should prepare students for failures.
41. Some therapists warn that young adults tend to pursue perfection in their work.
42. Psychologist Amy Bach encourages her students to aim high but be content with something less than perfect.
43. A clinical psychologist finds perfectionism is widespread among his clients.
44. In trying to overcome perfectionism,some people are still pursuing perfection.
45. In pursuing perfection,some perfectionists fail to complete their tasks on time.

### Section C

**Directions:** _There are 2 passages in this section. Each passage is followed by some questions or unfinished statements. For each of them there are four choices marked A), B), C) and D). You should decide on the best choice and mark the corresponding letter on **Answer Sheet 2** with a single line through the centre._

#### Passage One

**Questions 46 to 50 are based on the following passage.**

How on earth did we come to this? We protect our children obsessively from every harm; we scrutinize every carer, teacher or doctor with whom they come into contact. Yet despite all this, one group, which in no way has their best interests at heart, has almost unconstrained access.

We seem to take it for granted that advertisers and marketers are allowed to condition even the youngest children. Before children have even developed a proper sense of their own identity, or learned to handle money, they're encouraged to associate status and self-worth with stuff, and to look to external things such as fame and wealth for validation. We're turning out little consumers rather than young citizens who will value themselves for what they contribute to the society in which they live.

We've reached this point so gradually that many of us have never questioned it. It's crept up on us in the 60 years since advertisers started to target the young and found that they could recruit them to a commercial assault on their parents. We've come to know it as“pester power"or the ability of children to pressure parents to make certain purchases.

Many psychologists, child development experts and educators point to research suggesting that this emerging cradle-to-grave consumerism is contributing to growing rates of low self-esteem, depression and other forms of mental illness.

Not all psychologists agree. There're plenty working hand in glove with a f12bn-a-year industry that has turned the manipulation of adult emotions and desires into an art form — often literally. It's also one that's forever developing new ways to persuade our children to desire material possessions, and because of advertisements'viral effect they only need to infect a few to reach the many. Advertising and marketing can serve a useful purpose for children. Marketing may help socialize children as consumers, inform them about products, and help them carve out unique identities as they reach adulthood.

Then, should we ban all advertising aimed at young children? I say yes.

Of course there'll be plenty of objections to an outright ban on advertising to the under-11s. There'll be those who argue that would be a breach of freedom of speech and infringe the rights of corporations to brainwash little children into demanding their products.

Most parents hate what advertising does to their children, but we do have the power to end it and let our children grow up free from many of the pressures of consumerism until they're old enough to make their own decisions. And though advertising is only part of an _all-pervasive_ (无处不在的) marketing culture we need to make a start somewhere. Let's ban all advertising targeting children of primary school age and younger now.

46. Which group of people does the author say has almost unrestricted access to children?  
    A) Advertisers.  
    B) Carers.  
    C) Teachers.  
    D) Doctors.

47. What kind of people should we enable children to become according to the author?  
    A) Those who look to fame and wealth for external and ultimate validation.  
    B) Those who value themselves because of their contribution to society.  
    C) Those who associate self-worth with the ability to handle money.  
    D) Those who have developed a proper sense of their own identity.

48. Many child development experts and educators call attention to research that suggests  
    A) life-long consumerism is causing more and more cases of psychological problems.  
    B) increasing commercialization of education is eroding many children's self-esteem.  
    C) the growing desire for wealth is contributing to a rising rate of depression.  
    D) the craving for purchasing material things is nurtured throughout one's life.

49. What does the author imply about the impact of advertising?  
    A) It is actually infectious to many rather than a few.  
    B) It is rooted in our desire for material possessions.  
    C) It is comparable to that of virus.  
    D) It is literally limited to children.

50. What is the opponents'argument against a complete ban on advertising to young children?  
    A) It would deprive them of the chance to learn about products.  
    B) It would render them unable to carve out unique identities.  
    C) It would breach their freedom as would-be consumers.  
    D) It would violate the rights endowed upon advertisers.

#### Passage Two

**Questions 51 to 55 are based on the following passage.**

Many oppose workplace surveillance, because of the inherent dehumanizing effect it has and the relentless pressure it brings. But it's on the rise around the world as firms look to become more efficient by squeezing more productivity from their workers. More than half of companies with over $750m in annual revenue used “non-traditional”monitoring techniques on staff last year.

Monitoring employee performance gives firms the ability to assess how their staff are performing and interacting, which can be good for both the firm and employees themselves. A growing number of analytics companies offer this service. They gather“data exhaust”left by employees'email and instant messaging apps, and use name badges equipped with radio-frequency identification devices and microphones. These can check how much time you spend talking, your volume and tone of voice, even if you do not dominate conversations. While this may sound intrusive, exponents argue that it can also protect employees against bullying and sexual harassment.

Some of this data analysis can produce unexpected results. For example, it was found that people who sat at 12-person lunch tables tended to interact, share ideas more and outperform those who regularly sat at four-person tables, a fact that would probably have gone undetected without such data analysis.

Over the last few years a Stockholm co-working space called Epicenter has gone much further and holds popular“chipping parties”, where people can have microchips implanted in their hands. They can use the implants to access electronically-controlled doors, or monitor how typing speed correlates with heart rate. Implanted chips may seem extreme, but it is a relatively small step from ID cards and biometrics to such devices.

As long as such schemes are voluntary, there will probably be a growing number of convenience-oriented uses so that a substantial number of workers would opt to have a chip inserted. But if implanted chips are used to reduce slack time or rest breaks, that could prove to be detrimental. And if surveillance tools take away autonomy, that's when they prove most unpopular. A lot depends on how such monitoring initiatives are communicated and this could prevent possible revolts being staged.

If bosses don't communicate effectively, employees assume the worst. But if they're open about the information they're collecting and what they're doing with it, research suggests 46%of employees are generally okay with it. Although many such monitoring schemes use anonymised data and participation is voluntary, many staffers remain skeptical and fear an erosion of their civil liberties.

So workplace surveillance could be empowering for staff and useful for companies looking to become more efficient and profitable. But implemented in the wrong way, it could also become an unpopular tool of oppression that proves counterproductive.

51. Why are many people opposed to monitoring employee performance?  
    A) It puts workers under constant pressure.  
    B) It is universally deemed anti-human by nature.  
    C) It does both mental and physical harm to employees monitored.  
    D) It enables firms to squeeze maximal productivity from employees.

52. What is the supporters'argument for workplace surveillance?  
    A) It enables employees to refrain from dominating conversations.  
    B) It enhances employees'identification with firms they work in.  
    C) It can alert employees to intrusion into their privacy.  
    D) It can protect employees against aggressive behavior.

53. What does the author want to show by the example of different numbers of people interacting at lunch tables?  
    A) Data analysis is key to the successful implementation of workplace surveillance.  
    B) Analyzing data gathered from workers can yield something unexpected.  
    C) More workmates sitting at a lunch table tend to facilitate interaction and idea sharing.  
    D) It is hard to decide on how many people to sit at a lunch table without data analysis.

54. What does much of the positive effect of monitoring initiatives depend on?  
    A) How frequently employees are to be monitored.  
    B) What specific personal information is being excluded.  
    C) What steps are taken to minimize their detrimental impact.  
    D) How well bosses make known their purpose of monitoring.

55. What concern do monitoring initiatives cause among many staffers?  
    A) They may empower employers excessively.  
    B) They may erode the workplace environment.  
    C) They may infringe upon staffers'entitled freedom.  
    D) They may become counterproductive in the long run.

## Part IV / Translation / (30 minutes)

**Directions:** _For this part, you are allowed 30 minutes to translate a passage from Chinese into English. You should write your answer on **Answer Sheet 2**._

随着中国经济的快速发展和人们生活水平的稳步提高，城市居民对环境和生活品质的要求越来越高。中国地方政府更加注重公共设施的建设和改进，以更好地满足人们的需求。通过兴建新的广场、公园和公共绿地或对原有公共场地重新加以规划改造，许多城市为市民提供了更多休闲和社交的场所。如今，政府出资购置的健身器械和铺设的健身步道在不少城市随处可见，既明显改善了市民户外活动的条件, 又使城市更加美丽。
